["During a fiery speech, one figure in this book proclaims that God \"does not dwell in houses made with human hands.\" This text relates how Demetrius began a riot of silversmiths who kidnapped Gaius and Aristarchus. This book quotes Deuteronomy 18 in proclaiming the arrival of a new Moses, and includes Gamaliel's warning to a court against executing a pair of men, an unusually tolerant portrayal of a Pharisee. A wind from Heaven in this book animates a group of men, who then begin speaking in tongues. This book recounts the stoning of Stephen, after which one of his persecutors is blinded on the road to Damascus and changes his name from Saul to Paul. For 10 points, name this continuation of the Gospel of Luke describing the activities of Christ's followers after his death.", "Acts of the Apostles", "H"]
["In one text, every time this man does something tamiyd, or daily, it is unusually not preceded by the word for sacrifice. This figure became sick for days after having a vision of a one-horned goat fighting an asymmetricallyhorned ram. This man and his friends insist on eating vegetables instead of the food given to them by a king. In a story from this man's namesake book, Abednego, Meshach, and Shadrach refuse to worship a golden statue and are thrown into a furnace. This man explained the meaning of a statue with a head of gold and feet of clay that appeared in Nebuchadnezzar's dream, and read the writing on the wall at Belshazzar's feast. For 10 points, name this Old Testament figure who was miraculously unharmed in a lions' den.", "Daniel", "H"]
["At the beginning of Revelation, John sees the Lord standing among this many golden candlesticks. In John, Jesus makes this many \"I am\" statements. The Counting of the Omer lasts this many weeks. In Revelation, a dragon with ten horns and this many heads appears soon after angels blow this many trumpets. On the last day of his siege, Joshua is told to march around Jericho this many times before the wall will collapse. The Book of Ezekiel records this many of the prophet's visions. Noah is told to take this many pairs of each clean animal onto the ark. Chastity and temperance are among this many virtues of Christianity. For 10 points, on what numbered day of the JudeoChristian Creation did God rest?", "7 (number)", "H"]
["One text central to this faith follows a man variously tracking, chasing, and riding the central animal, which then disappears. This faith's founder cut off his eyelids to prevent himself from falling asleep while staring at a wall for nine years, and after his death left a single shoe for followers to discover in his grave. One of this religion's scriptures is named after the Platform of its Sixth Patriarch, Huineng. Achieving insight, or kensho, is the main goal of this religion's Rinzai sect. Several statements important to this religion are collected in the Blue Cliff Record, which contains paradoxical statements known as koans. For 10 points, name this Mahayana sect founded by Bodhidharma which is commonly practiced through meditation and is popular in Japan.", "Zen", "H"]
["The chronologically first event commemorated on the 17th of Tammuz was due to a transgression organized by this man. A revolt occurred after this man allegedly took all of a widow's sheep, and his younger brother wouldn't let her plow the entirety of her field. An object owned by this man budded and yielded almonds, and had earlier turned into a snake which swallowed those produced by some magicians. Because the Lord's fire consumed his sons Nadab and Alihu, this figure was succeeded by his son Eleazar after his death on Mount Hor. This eldest son of Amram and Yochebed became the first High Priest, and, while waiting for a descent from Mt. Sinai, he assisted the Israelites in the creation of the Golden Calf. For 10 points, identify this older brother of Moses.", "Aaron", "H"]
["Laws pertaining to this subject comprise the last three chapters of Melachim u-Milchamot [\"M'lah-KHEEM oo meel-kha-MOAT\"], the final section of the Mishnah. This occurrence is the subject of the fifteenth part of the Amidah. The twelfth of Maimonides' thirteen principles is an expression of faith about it. The appearance of a tenth red heifer coincides with this occurrence, as does a state of the world in which either everyone is good or everyone is wicked. An Olam Haba will follow this occurrence, which could happen if everyone observes two consecutive Shabbats. Followers of Sabbatai Zevi and Bar Kokhba believed that this event had happened. This event will see a descendant of David re-establish the Sanhedrin and build the Third Temple. For 10 points, what is this event, after which an anointed Jewish figure will usher in the End of Days?", "Testament of Adam", "H"]
["The Hadith of Jabir notes that the first things created with light by Allah were the pen, the tablet, water, and this kind of object. The Zoroastrian Nowruz holiday celebrates a notable event involving a jewel-encrusted example of this object belonging to Jamshid. The prophet Zechariah has a vision of the sinful priest Joshua standing next to one of these objects. Muhammad recommended nightly recitations of a prayer named for this kind of object, which in Revelation is flanked by a man, an ox, an eagle, and a lion \u0096 all of whom are winged and covered in eyes. A passage named for this kind of object concludes that Allah is the highest and most glorious, and is the 255th aya in the Cow Surah. For 10 points, name this celestial object upon which God rests in both Christianity and Islam.", "Throne of God", "H"]
["Performing this kind of action in Hinduism is considered profane if done after consuming certain food, since it implies you think you're too good for prasad. In Shinto, this action is aided with a band of paper streamers attached to a stick, the onusa, and is known as harae. Jesus levels charges of hypocrisy at the pharisees after being scolded because his disciples do not perform this action. A Jewish ritual combines the herb called ezov and yarn with the ashes of a red heifer to perform an extreme type of this action. Islam permits tayammum, performing this action with sand, though more commonly calls for ghusl or wudu, the latter of which precedes salat prayer. For 10 points, name this religious ritual often performed by washing all or part of the body.", "Ritual purification", "H"]
["The Zohar relates that one figure in this book was later brought back to life after being killed when a man's recently-judged soul passed through it. According to midrash, one character in this book had earlier incorrectly prophesied about the destruction of Jerusalem. Despite the inhabitants of a city in this book not being able to distinguish their right hand from left, that city's king wears sackcloth and covers himself in ashes to repent. God sends a worm in this book to kill a gourd vine that provides shade to its protagonist. The title character runs away on a boat from Tarshish because he doesn't want to travel to Nineveh, but is thrown overboard by the sailors to appease God during a storm. For 10 points, name this Old Testament book whose title prophet is swallowed by a giant fish or whale.", "Book of Jonah", "H"]
["A thinker who is most famously associated with this practice held a widely attended and acclaimed Prayer for Interfaith Peace, which he then followed up with a somewhat-less-acclaimed prayer to terminate the Jews before they could destroy al-Aqsa. Among the tricky parts of this practice is encountering problematic noons, which can be merged or converted. This action is termed khatm when it concludes with \"al-Nas.\" or \"the People.\" The rules for performing this action are known as tajweed, and those who could perform it in its entirety were known by the title hafiz. \"Al-Fatiha\" is the most commonly used text for this action, as it is recited in every salaah. For 10 points, identify this action in which a Muslim speaks aloud from the Islamic holy text.", "Tajwid", "H"]
["The country's chant tradition was established by the Book of Digua, which is often performed by itinerant debterat who protect its faithful against shape-shifting witches known as buda. This country's church reveres Saint Yared and a group of proselytizers known as the Nine Saints. A book held canonical by the major churches in this country describes the \"Apocalypse of Weeks\" and opens with a description of the Watchers, angels known as Grigori; that text is the Book of Enoch. Saint Frumentius is credited with introducing Christianity to this country, which is identified with Zion and as the seat of Jah according to another faith.The home to a community of Jews called Beta Israel, for 10 points, name this African country once ruled by the holy figure of Rastafarianism, Haile Selassie I.", "Ethiopia", "H"]
["The king would perform this action once every seven years in the practice of Hakhel. A maftir is the final person to do it on a given day. People performing this action must have earlier studied the associated neginnot and trope symbols, which can be found in a tikkun. The central object of this practice is divided into 54 parashot [\"pah-rahSHOTE\"], one of which is for it each week. A prayer said before it occurs begins Barchu et Adonai hamvorach. This action's performer stands on a bimah and makes use of the yad, a pointer that prevents damage from oily fingers. Before this action takes place, the central object is removed from the ark and carried through the synagogue. For 10 points, identify this practice where one chants passages from a Jewish holy book.", "Yad", "M"]
["During evening prayer services on this holiday, many married men wear a robe called a kittel that is otherwise used as a funeral shroud. One minor tradition on this holiday is the reading of the entire Book of Jonah during the afternoon service. Oral tradition dictates that people may not wash themselves or have sex while observing this holiday. One important prayer during this holiday is recited in Aramaic rather than the usual Hebrew; that is the Kol Nidre. It is observed with a 25-hour fast and special synagogue services. For 10 points, name this Day of Atonement, the holiest day of the year in Judaism.", "Yom Kippur", "M"]
["These events are traditionally preceded by the giving of a mohar, and modern versions of an item made for these events generally include a Lieberman clause to prevent these events from ending in an Agunah. The results of these events can be reversed by the issuing of a \"get\". Seven blessings are said during these events, which are preceded by an erusin period and the signing of a ketubah. These events usually take place underneath a canopy called a chuppah and always end with a man crushing a wine glass with his foot. For 10 points, name these events during which, according to Ashkenazi tradition, a veil covers the face of the bride.", "P'tcha", "M"]
["This person was crowned after his predecessor fell on his sword at the end of a battle at Mount Gilboa. He earned the respect of that predecessor by bringing back 200 foreskins. When he was a child, this son of Jesse was taken from his family by a man whose spirit was later summoned by the Witch of Endor. He had Uriah [\"you-RYE-uh\"] the Hittite killed to hide the fact that he had impregnated Uriah's wife Bathsheba, who then married him and gave birth to his son Solomon. The story of this successor of Saul is one of the main subjects of the Books of Samuel. For 10 points, name this author of the Psalms, a King of Israel who killed the giant Philistine Goliath.", "David", "H"]
["An African-American spiritual titled for this substance contains the chorus \"if you cannot sing like angels, if you can't preach like Paul, you can tell the love of Jesus, and say he died for all.\" A town in Maine originally called Peabody's Patent was named because it was thought to contain this substance. An admonishment to the church in Laodicea in Revelations that they've become blind evokes an irony to an Old Testament mention of this substance. Joseph is sold by his brothers to caravans that are carrying, among other goods, this substance, which Josephus writes was one of the gifts to King Solomon from the Queen of Sheba. Jeremiah 46:11 tells the \"virgin daughter of Egypt\" to obtain this substance, while Jeremiah 8:22 asks rhetorically about this substance prior to asking \"Is there no physician there?\" For 10 points, identify this perfume used medicinally and named for a region lying in the Biblical kingdom of Judah.", "Balm of Gilead", "H"]
["This text notes that a tree may be referred to as \"seven-leaved\" when it does not actually have seven leaves to explain the title of one of its sections. Another section of this text enumerates nine types of doubt that people may have concerning gains and losses. This text refutes the opinion of the Lokayatikas that religious ordinances should not be observed and argues that the title concept is worthy of scholarly discussion even though it is common to all creatures. This text recommends that Dharma be practiced mainly during old age, while Artha and the title concept should be practiced mainly during youth and middle age, and it classifies women as either \"deer,\" \"mares,\" or \"elephants.\" This text written by Vatsyayana includes chapters titled \"About Females Acting the Part of Males\" and \"Of the Embrace.\" For 10 points, identify this text named for the Hindu god of love, which notably contains a sex manual.", "Kama Sutra", "H"]
["The academic study of these texts is the subject of an essay by Jean Jacques Waardenburg that seeks to determine whether there is a standard methodology for writing them. One of these texts states that distinct black and white threads represent the darkness of the night and the lightness of the day, while another notes that Jesus cannot be held accountable for being deified after his death and therefore is not part of the \"firewood of hell\" made from inanimate objects of worship. These texts are called diraya when they are based on ijtihad, or independent reasoning, and they are called riwaya when they're based on sources like the tabi'un and sahabah. Authors of these texts, exemplified by al-Zamakhshari and al-Tabari, are known as mufassirun. To be considered authoritative, those authors of these texts must have mastered fifteen fields of study, among which are fiqh and classical Arabic. These works include taw'il and tafsir. For 10 points, identify these texts that explain the meaning of passages from the holy book of Islam.", "Naskh (script)", "H"]
["Zoroastrians celebrate this event by performing the Haft-Sin, in which they set a table with seven items that are chosen because they all start with the latter \"S\" in Arabic. That tradition celebrating this event was initiated by King Jamshid on the day that he was raised up into the heavens on a throne of jewels. A Yoruban custom of celebrating this event is now called the Odunde Festival. Shinto practitioners have gatherings called shinenkai to celebrate this event on gantan-sai, and Tibetans refer to it as Losar. Other rituals performed on this day include the playing of a dice game called \"fish-prawn-crab,\" and the throwing of bread crumbs into a flowing body of water. Elders give red envelopes filled with money to their children in a Vietnamese custom on this day, which is the first of the Jewish High Holy Days. For 10 points, name this celebration which includes the Tet holiday and Rosh Hashanah.", "New Year's Day", "H"]
["St. Augustine disagreed with St. Jerome's interpretation of one incident involving a rebuke of this man, claiming it was not staged. That incident involving this man took place at Antioch after this man and Barnabas were misled by a group of Jews, as recounted in Chapter 2 of Galatians. This man cites the time being nine o'clock in the morning to explain that he and his companions are not drunk before preaching a sermon that converts three thousand. This man sat with the servants during Jesus' trial and suggests building three tabernacles during the Transfiguration, though in Matthew he is rebuked with \"get thee behind me satan\" by Jesus. In John, this man smites the high priest's servant Malchus and this reviver of Tabitha is accosted while warming his hands by a woman during the first of three times he denies knowing Jesus. For 10 points, identify this apostle, the \"rock\" on which the Christian church was founded.", "Peter", "H"]
["One member of this family, whose collected writings were published by Charles Wallace, used the motto \"strength guided by kindness\" for teaching children, and had a practice of pulling her apron over her head for one hour each week to pray. Another member of this family wrote a physics manual The Desideratum, subtitled \"Electricity Made Plain and Useful\" based on his experiments, and founded the Kingswood School. Another man with this surname wrote the original words to \"Hark! The Herald Angels Sing\" and many other carols. He served as chaplain at St. Simon's Island in Georgia, where he was appointed Secretary of Indian Affairs by James Oglethorpe. The writings of a better-known member of this family, like A Plain Account of Christian Perfection, inspired people like Francis Asbury to lead the Holiness Movement. For 10 points, name this family which included Samuel, Susanna, Charles, and John, who was the founder of Methodism.", "Epworth, Lincolnshire", "H"]
["A leader of this religious sect became stuck in the ground at a certain spot while walking in a garden, and after a number of blindfolded followers also got stuck there, that spot became known as \"the jiba,\" or the symbolic location where all humans were created. After that incident, a wooden stand with the power to create magical food to allow humans to live 115 years was placed in the sanctuary of this faith. One of its primary scriptures is called the \"Tip of the Writing Brush,\" because it was supposedly created automatically. Its adherents attend the nine Besseki lectures in order to sweep away the eight \"Dusts\" that are said to plague the mind in this faith. This sect believed that a figure called Oyasama revealed the teachings of \"God the Parent,\" and taught people to live the Joyous Life. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Miki Nakayama, also known as the Foundress, while she was living in Japan around 1840.", "Tenrikyo", "H"]
["Paintings of the nativity traditionally include an ox and an ass because of this book's line \"the ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib.\" The hymn \"Beulah Land\" comes from this book's declaration that Israel's name will one day be changed to Hephzibah and Beulah. Its fortieth chapter describes how \"every valley shall be exalted and every mountain and hill shall be made low\" in the process of building a straight highway to God. This book is the source of the idea that Israel should be a \"light unto the nations,\" and its fifty-third chapter inspired the depiction of Christ as the Man of Sorrows. Its narrator begins to prophesy after an angel uses a burning coal to purify his mouth, and predicts that in the \"last days,\" people will beat their swords into plowshares. For 10 points, name this book of the Old Testament whose prophecy of the virgin birth of Immanuel was used as proof of the divinity of Jesus.", "Book of Isaiah", "H"]
["A legend says that this man rebuked the merchant Makhan Shah for offering him two gold coins, because the Shah had previously pledged 500 gold coins to anyone who could save his belongings in a storm. That incident caused the Shah to identify him as a holy man, while he was meditating for 20 years in Bakala. He was arrested in Bihar and brought to Delhi by a ruler who had solidified his power at the Battle of Samugarh. That occurred after this man prevented the conversion of 500 Pandits who sought his counsel. As a result, he gained the epithet Hind-di-Chaadar, or the Shield of India. This man's son emerged from a tent five times with a bloody sword to test the loyalty of his followers, and thus founded the Khalsa order. Beheaded in 1675 by Aurangzeb, this man succeeded Har Krishan as guru, and was the son of Hargobind. For 10 points, name this ninth guru of Sikhism, the father of Gobind Singh.", "Guru Tegh Bahadur", "H"]
["According to Abu 'l-Fath's Kitab al Ta'Rikh, the first members of this religious sect were the loyal children of Hophne and Phinehas and the women they slept with inside a tabernacle.Josephus' Antiquities claims that this sect was comprised of pagan Sidonians and that it worshipped Jupiter Hellenius. This religious group rejects Mount Moriah as the location where Abraham almost sacrificed Isaac; instead, they perform sheep sacrifices during the \"Festival of the Sacrifice\" where they believe it happened, Mount Gerizim. This sect claims direct descent from the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, and it may have been formed after Sargon II conquered their namesake land. This sect, which split from the Jews in antiquity, has only about 800 remaining members, who live mostly in Holon and Kiryat Luza. For 10 points, name this religious sect, one of whom kind- heartedly showed hospitality to a man beaten by robbers in a parable told by Jesus.", "Samaritans", "H"]
["The Massachusetts-born Episcopalian William Reed Huntington added to this series by providing a piece titled for an \"American point of view.\" Four pieces towards the end of this collection are entitled \"Catena Patrum,\" while two others examine the doctrine of John Cosin. A small number of works in this collection were written by Hurrell Froude, but he died of tuberculosis before it was completed. The final piece in this collection caused a firestorm by arguing that the Thirty Nine Articles were compatible with the Council of Trent and general Catholic practice. Written over a period from 1833 to 1841, the more notable authors of this collection included John Keble and Edward Pusey, and its title became a synonym for the movement that produced it. For 10 points, name this series of 90 works about the theology of the Oxford Movement, many written by John Henry Newman, which caused his movement to be dubbed the Tractarians.", "Tracts for the Times", "H"]
["One member of this group avoided having his son married into a rival clan by staying drunk for 60 straight days, so he couldn't give his consent to the wedding; he also rebuked the northern Ruan family by taking his underwear off in public. That group by this name was led by the alchemist Ji Kang, a master of the zither instrument who supported the Xuanxue movement, or the Dark Learning, popular among scholars in the south during the Six Dynasties. The earliest reference to a group by this name is probably the Apkallu in Sumerian legend, which are half-fish creatures that emerged from the primordial Abzu water to teach humans. In addition to a neo-Taoist group named for meeting at the \"Bamboo Grove,\" this name is shared by another group that gets recreated during every Manvantara. That group includes a man whose wives Aditi and Diti gave birth to the Asuras and the Devas. For 10 points, Kashyapa is a member of what group, which consists of a certain number of enlightened men?", "Seven Sages", "H"]
["This religious leader's followers included David Darrow, who was arrested by local commissioners after being suspected of providing a flock of sheep to the \"enemy.\" As a youth, this figure participated in the \"silent meditations\" organized by James and Jane Wardley who were themselves inspired by Camisards. According to Frederick W. Evans, who wrote a leading history of the group this person is affiliated with, a \"special manifestation of divine light\" appeared to this figure at the age of 22. Originally from Manchester, several followers including James Whittaker and John Hocknell joined this self-proclaimed \"Bride of the Lamb\" in settling at Watervliet, near the city of Albany, where she founded the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing and preached communal ownership of goods and celibacy. For 10 points, identify this Shaker leader known by the epithet \"Mother.\"", "Ann Lee", "H"]
["For a short time, this figure resided at the home of doctor William Willcocks Sleigh, who published an account of the six days she spent in Philadelphia. Originally, she was a mistress of William Hoyte, the head of the Benevolent Association, and traveled with him to New York, but abandoned him to be the companion of J.J. Slocum, whom she later joined in filing a lawsuit against both Hoyte and George Bourne. The American Protestant Vindicator first detailed this woman's story, which was published one year after Rebecca Reed released a similar tale. She spent \"five years as a novice and two years as a black nun\" at the Hotel Dieu Nunnery in Montreal, where she claimed to see a graveyard of dead babies. Her life was the basis for the most widely-read contemporary book in America prior to Uncle Tom's Cabin, due to thirst for anti-Catholic literature. For 10 points, name this nun, the subject of a sensational 1836 book about her \"Awful Disclosures.\"", "Maria Monk", "H"]
["In Cao Dai, the first of the three jewels, tinh, which represents matter and the body, is accompanied by the offering of one of these things. Eighteen of these items are carved on the Jewel Promenade platform at Mahabodhi Temple Complex where the Buddha walked. A text named for one of these items is divided into \"theoretical teachings,\" consisting of the first fourteen chapters\u0096including one on the \"Expedient Means\"\u0096and the \"essential teachings,\" which include the \"Life Span\" chapter. In ancient Rome, hanging these items upside down over a table meant that discussions were private. After a vision at the Hill of Tepeyac, a Mexican peasant had a bunch of these items fall out of his tilma when he visited the Archbishop, after which an image of the Virgin of Guadalupe appeared on his cloak. For 10 points, name these plants that include the lotus, lily-of-the-valley, and rose.", "Flower", "H"]
["In Cao Dai, the first of the three jewels, tinh, which represents matter and the body, is accompanied by the offering of one of these things. Eighteen of these items are carved on the Jewel Promenade platform at Mahabodhi Temple Complex where the Buddha walked. A text named for one of these items is divided into \"theoretical teachings,\" consisting of the first fourteen chapters\u0096including one on the \"Expedient Means\"\u0096and the \"essential teachings,\" which include the \"Life Span\" chapter. In ancient Rome, hanging these items upside down over a table meant that discussions were private. After a vision at the Hill of Tepeyac, a Mexican peasant had a bunch of these items fall out of his tilma when he visited the Archbishop, after which an image of the Virgin of Guadalupe appeared on his cloak. For 10 points, name these plants that include the lotus, lily-of-the-valley, and rose.", "Flower", "H"]
["One text by this man begins with a quote from the Epistle of James, extracts four gifts in the form of \"lights\" from it, and then examines the six \"illuminations\" that come from it. He associated those illuminations with the days of creation, followed on the seventh day by the \"illumination of glory.\" This man conceived of most creatures as \"shadows\" or \"vestiges,\" but rational beings as \"images\" or \"likenesses\" of God. This author of On Retracing the Arts to Theology referred to his teacher Alexander of Hales as his master. He used an Aristotelian-scientific approach to draw Augustinian conclusions like the \"aitiological argument\" in his commentary on the Sentences. He died at the Second Council of Lyons, where he was eulogized. In his most famous work, he allegorized an angelic vision of Saint Francis as a path to God. For 10 points, name this Seraphic Doctor who wrote the Journey of the Mind to God.", "St Bonaventure's High School", "H"]
["One text claims this figure was poisoned six times, and on the last time, he let himself be buried, only to return holding one shoe in his hand. In Japan, this figure is depicted as a hollow red doll with blanked eyes, one of which gets filled when setting a goal, and the other of which is filled after succeeding in that goal. He told his best student that he had attained his \"marrow,\" which was deeper than the bones, flesh, or skin attained by other disciples. That student, Huike [hway-kuh] spent weeks in the snow begging to be his disciple, and was finally accepted after he cut off his left arm. The Song of Enlightenment says this man was 28th in a line beginning with Mahakasyapa, who smiled in response to Shakyamuni picking up a white lotus flower. The tea plant sprang from his eyelids after he cut them off to avoid sleeping while staring at a wall for 9 years, a practice later known as zazen. For 10 points, name this so-called \"First Patriarch of Chan,\" an Indian-born monk who spread Zen Buddhism to China.", "Bodhidharma", "H"]
["Because one chapter of this text includes a history of the Lombards, it was sometimes called the Lombardica Historia. The preface to this text divides the ecclesiastical year into four periods, corresponding to four periods in the history of the world. It includes a story of the destruction of a dragon residing in a pit in Rome, leading to one of this text's many tales of exorcism, dealing with Silvester, who's also the subject of one of its many etymologies. The writings of Jean de Mailly and Bartholomew of Trent are major sources for this text's stories. The story of St. Barbara derives almost entirely from this source text. After being derided for fancifulness by the humanists, this text resurged in popularity as a representation of the piety of the middle ages, and is now one of the standard references for medieval Christian lore. For 10 points, name this hagiographical collection by Jacobus de Voragine.", "Golden Legend", "H"]
["While in Gallipoli, this man was often visited in his prison, called the \"Tower of Strength.\" His followers eventually divided into family branches including Kapanc\u0131 and Yakubi. This man's birth is prophesied in a forged document titled \"The Great Wisdom of Solomon.\" His teacher Joseph Escapa excommunicated him after he was expelled for staging a wedding service in which he pretended to marry the Torah. Descendants of his followers were known as do\u0308nme, or converts; those descendants followed syncretic traditions drawing from Sufi Islam. Followed by Nathan of Gaza, this Romaniote preached in Salonica until he was forced into exile after proclaiming himself Eyn Sof, the Kabbalistic origin of all things. A book about him by Gershom Scholem is subtitled the \"Mystical Messiah.\" For 10 points, name this man who claimed to the Jewish messiah in the 17th century Ottoman Empire.", "Sabbatai Zevi", "H"]
["The Bukusu tribe of Kenya have a creator god Wele Khakaba who put a giant one of these creatures in the sky to create thunder and lightning. In the Analects, Confucius hears the sound of musical instruments and singing, and asks his disciple Tzu-yu why he would \"use an ox cleaver\" to kill one of these. Pope Gregory the Great claimed that this creature was the \"most suitable emblem of Christianity.\" A chameleon, a snail shell filled with dirt, and one of these animals was carried by the Yoruban god Olodumare when he descended to earth on a chain. In Matthew, Jesus addresses \"Jerusalem, Jerusalem\" and admonishes its people for refusing him when he wanted to gather its children together like this animal. The kapparot ritual in Judaism involves swinging one of these animals over one's head before Yom Kippur. The Supreme Court case Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah involved a local ordinance forbidding sacrifice of, for 10 points, what kosher fowl often killed by Santeria adherents?", "Chicken", "H"]
["One of these figures carelessly drags a string of coins earned from castanet performances around behind them, and is often depicted as androgynous. Another of these figures received a dream as a teenager advising her to subsist entirely on powdered mica or mother of pearl. They're not loa, but these figures can \"descend\" and possess the bodies of men during a certain harvest festival. Many of these figures are depicted carrying fly whisks, and several of them were taken to heaven by cranes. One of these figures owned a white donkey that he could fold up and put in his pocket, while another returned from a spirit journey to find that his mortal body had been cremated, forcing him to possess a decrepit beggar and walk with an iron crutch. A member of this group leapt to his feet as a seven-day-old baby and announced that his name was \"recorded in the capital of the Jade Emperor.\" For 10 points, name this group including Zhongli Quan, Lu Dongbin, and Li Tieguai, who are known in Daoism for their infinite lifespan.", "Eight Immortals", "H"]
["The town of Eger in Hungary is home to one of these structures that marks the northernmost point of Ottoman expansion. One of these structures was hypothesized to be the last standing monument of the lost city of Turquoise Mountain, and was built to celebrate the defeat of Prithviraj Chauhan by a ruler of the Ghurid Dynasty\u0096that one is at the site of Jam. The founder of the Ahmadiyya movement, Mirza Ahmad, built a white one at Qadian to fulfill a hadith about the descent of Jesus. The tallest one in the world was designed by French architect Michel Pinseau, at the bidding of King Hassan II. The first ruler of the Delhi Sultanate built one called the Qutb (kut-ub), named in honor of its dedicatee, a Sufi mystic. Traditionally, the adhan or call to prayer is given from the gallery of one of these structures by a muezzin. For 10 points, name these tall spires that are often attached to mosques.", "Minaret", "H"]
["Some Vajrayana Buddhists consider these real-world creatures to be Dakini, a type of angelic psychopomp. They are propitiated at buildings made of three concentric stone circles of varying height. In a ritual meant to satisfy these creatures, a master known as a rogyapa uses a slicing knife during readings from the Tibetan Book of the Dead. On a peak named for these creatures near Ramnagar, the Heart Sutra and Lotus Sutra were delivered by the Buddha. When not shown as an eagle, Garuda's brother Jatayu is one of these creatures, whose recent chemical-caused extinction around Mumbai has threatened the use of dakhmas there by Parsis. For 10 points, name these birds which come to Tibetan \"sky-burials\" and Zoroastrian Towers of Silence to eat decomposing corpses.", "Vulture", "H"]
["A 9th-century letter denying this event, opening with the words \"Cogitis me,\" was written to Paula and Eustochium by a Pseudo-Jerome. St. John Damascene is sometimes called the \"Doctor of\" this event due to his three sermons on it. The 4th Glorious Mystery of the Rosary contemplates this event, which is traditionally held to have left lilies behind. The latest ex cathedra infallible declaration, Munificentissimus Deus, established this as dogma in 1950 under Pope Pius XII. A feast on August 15 honors this event, which in Eastern Orthodox tradition was preceded by a sleep called the Dormition. Like Jesus's resurrection, it left behind an empty tomb. For 10 points, name this unique event at the end of the Virgin Mary's life, in which she arose \"body and soul\" into Heaven.", "Assumption of Mary", "H"]
["In a poetic passage named for this person, a cowardly tribe is asked \"Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks?\" and a mother cries through a window lattice, \"Why is his chariot so long in coming?\" This spouse of Lappidoth foresaw the need for ten thousand men to march to Mount Tabor for a battle whose loser was killed by a Kenite woman hammering a tent peg through the temple. That murder by Jael validated this person, who accompanied Barak upon suggesting a campaign against Sisera's iron chariots. This namesake of a poetic Hebrew \"Song\" sat under a palm tree between Ramah and Bethel to settle disputes before Gideon rose to prominence in a set of twelve pre-monarchical leaders. For 10 points, name this only female judge of the Israelites.", "Deborah", "H"]
["An interlude about mining which interrupts this man's story states that wisdom \"cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir.\" A 1952 book, which claims the Sophia archetype helped God attain self-consciousness by incarnating as Jesus, is Carl Jung's Answer to this man. This man asks if he has stone strength or brass flesh shortly before saying his \"brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook.\" A voice tells this man to \"gird [his] loins\" from within a whirlwind, asking him \"where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the Earth?\" This man gets rotating advice from Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar after his estate in Uz is destroyed and he is struck with boils due to a bet between God and Satan. For 10 points, name this pious namesake of an Old Testament book who nearly loses his faith in agony.", "Job", "H"]
["A 2011 trial for religious extremism in this country prosecuted a translation of The Bhagavad-Gita As It Is. In this non-Turkey country, the reformer Abdurrauf Fitrat promoted the teaching of usul ul-jadid in maktabs, initiating the Jadidism movement. Members of an exiled sect from this country established a large community in Woodburn, Oregon. This country was the birthplace of a pacifist movement whose name means \"Warriors of the Spirit,\" which conducted naked protests and eventually resettled in Canada. In this home of the doukhobors, the introduction of a three-fingered sign of the cross and other reforms by Nikon led to a schism with the Old Believers. For 10 points, name this country where Patriarch Kirill leads the most populous Orthodox church.", "Russia", "H"]
["It's not Habakkuk, but the story of this man is read as Haftarah on Shavuot. This man, who relates that he spent time along the Chebar river, uses human excrement as the fuel to cook his food while lying on his side for 430 days. Merkabah mysticism is based on an image from this man's accounts, which include a war launched against the land of Magog by the eponymous prince of Gog. This Biblical character sees the faces of men, lions, eagles, and oxen surrounding the throne of God on God's chariot, and has a vision of \"wheels turning inside of wheels\" before he is told to breathe life into a group of reanimated bodies in the \"valley of dry bones\". For 10 points, name this Old Testament prophet whose namesake book comes before Hosea and after the Lamentations attributed to Jeremiah.", "Ezekiel", "H"]
["A prophet of this name retells Zenos's [ZEE-nuss-iz] allegory, comparing Gentiles and Jews to cultivated and wild olive trees, in a namesake book which comes third in the Book of Mormon. This name graces the last man named in the opening of the Jewish Amidah prayer, a Biblical character who made peace with the leader of the Edomites after using peeled, spotted sticks in the process of breeding spotted sheep. That man of this name kept the rival concubines Bilhah and Zilpah, and worked two seven-year indentures for Laban after using the offer of a bowl of stew to trick his brother into handing over his birthright. For 10 points, give this name of the Hebrew patriarch who was born holding his twin brother Esau, and who was renamed Israel after wrestling an angel and seeing a namesake ladder to heaven.", "Jacob", "H"]
["This sect reveres a type of honesty called \"guarding one's tongue.\" This sect rose to prominence in the Chouf mountains. The phrase \"covenant of blood\" refers to this faith's willingness to serve in an army led by another faith. A \"universal mind\" or aql figures into this sect, which reveres the tomb of Sabalan. Adherents believe in exoteric, esoteric, and \"double hidden\" meanings within their Epistles of Wisdom, which are accessible by its majority-female uqqal subgroup but forbidden to juhhal. This faith, which bans intermarriage and conversion, draws on Platonist and Ismaili Shi'a tradition and venerates the caliph al-Hakim. For 10 points, name this secretive monotheistic faith symbolized by a five-colored star, which has historically fought for Israel and against its homeland of Lebanon.", "Druze", "H"]
["This act was performed on Rusticus and Eleutherius at the end of their lives, alongside a member of the Fourteen Holy Helpers. This act gives a descriptive name for a deity sometimes called Ai Apaec, who is usually shown with four fangs, a human head, and a spider or jaguar body on Moche artifacts from Peru. During 3rd century CE persecutions, a victim of this act in Gaul then walked for six miles making a speech about repentance; that legendary survivor of it was Saint Denis, the patron saint of France. In the New Testament, a byproduct of this act was displayed on a silver plate by Herod the Tetrarch in return for the \"dance of the seven veils\" by his stepdaughter Salome. For 10 points, name this method of execution used to kill John the Baptist.", "Decapitation", "H"]
["One of these people was made to sit on hot iron plates as burning-hot sand was poured over his body before his execution the next day by drowning in a river. A boy who got this title at age five identified a real queen in a test by sitting on her lap as she was dressed as maidservant, then died at nine from smallpox. The ritual for transferring this title involves five copper coins and a coconut. The most recent one has promulgated the Mul Mantar verse. The last in a set of these leaders called five volunteers to undergo mock-beheading in his tent. The dead body of the first one vanished amid flowers. This title is now and forever held by the Granth Sahib, a holy book. For 10 points, name this religious title whose tenth human holder was Gobind Singh, which was ascribed to Nanak as he began the Sikh faith.", "Sikh gurus", "H"]
["On some thangka wall-hangings, Yama holds one of these objects with a pig, a snake, and a rooster representing \"three poisons\" of bad attitude within it. Marpa and Milarepa began the practice of using horizontally-oriented examples of these objects, engraved with the mantra \"Om mani padme hum,\" in Tibetan Buddhist prayer. As Vishnu's other hands hold a conch, a lotus, and a mace, his upper-right hand holds a weaponized one of these objects. A Jain symbol shows a hand surrounding one. In Alexandria, one of these implements was intended to break St. Catherine, but she broke it with a touch. One of these with eight sectors is a common representation of dharma in South Asian faiths. For 10 points, name these objects which allow chariots representing Jagganath to roll.", "Wheel", "H"]
["Chapter 8 of this text notes that all creation is \"groaning\" as in the pains of childbirth; later, it compares its addressees to a branch grafted into an olive root, who must offer their bodies as \"living sacrifices.\" Augustine opened to this Biblical book after hearing the command \"Tolle, lege,\" which turned him Christian. A commentary on this text, stressing the \"wholly otherness of God,\" was written during World War I by Karl Barth. This text's third chapter states that all Jews and Gentiles alike have fallen short of the grace of God, and its sixth chapter says that \"the wages of sin is death.\" Martin Luther used this epistle to support justification by faith alone. For 10 points, name this first and longest New Testament epistle, addressed by Paul to the Jews of an imperial capital.", "Epistle to the Romans", "H"]
["Two objects sacred to this holiday, which resemble mouths and eyes respectively, are the aravah and the hadass. On its religion's calendar, this holiday is the first of the Shalosh Regalim each year. A prayer said on this holiday addressed to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron, Joseph, and David, seven Biblical shepherds, honors guests called ushpizin. The Hoshanah Rabbah is observed at the end of this holiday; right after that, Shemini Atzeret follows after this third holiday in the month of Tishrei. Four species of plants, including the lulav branch and etrog citrus fruit, are waved around on this holiday, which remembers the Israelites' wandering in the desert. For 10 points, name this week-long Jewish autumn holiday, whose observers build and live in outdoor wooden booths.", "Sukkot", "H"]
["The Quranic sura of this number, whose retelling of the Cain and Abel story notes that killing one person is like destroying all humanity, is called Al-Ma'ida, or \"The Table.\" Zaydi Muslims of Yemen include their namesake Zayd ibn Ali in a set totaling this number of imams, unlike either the Twelvers or the Seveners in mainstream Shi'a Islam. This is the lowest positive number of wives forbidden to a Muslim man at any given time. On the Middle Eastern hamsa charm, there are this many protrusions extending out from a central eye symbol. A set of this number of observances includes sawm, mandating fasting during Ramadan. For 10 points, give this number of times observant Muslims must pray per day, a requirement stated within this number of \"pillars\" of the Islamic faith.", "5 (number)", "H"]
["This text discusses a benevolent personage who treats people as \"dogs of grass,\" sometimes translated \"straw dogs,\" ought to be treated. This text's eleventh section notes that a thirty-spoke wheel is only useful because there's a space in the middle for the axle. This text compares the space between heaven and earth to a bellows and lauds a life-giving \"Great Mother\" or \"Mysterious Female.\" It notes in its second sentence that \"The name that can be named is not the eternal Name.\" The author of this 81-section text claimed that the journey of a thousand li, a mile-like unit, begins with a single step. For 10 points, name this text which espouses actionless wu wei, a book ascribed to Laozi which discourses on the namesake ineffable \"Way\" of a Chinese religion.", "Tao Te Ching", "H"]
["Medieval stories from this faith were collected in The Forest of Thieves and the Magic Garden by Yale scholar Phyllis Granoff. According to this non-Abrahamic faith, the distant past included \"wishing trees,\" which fulfilled needs when asked. Adherents of this faith believe that as a person behaves badly, particles accumulate on their soul, unless they become a kevalin. A minority sect of this religion believes that a great famine broke the transmission of all authentic Agama scriptures, and that Mallinath was a man, like all twenty-three of the other figures it reveres as \"ford-builders,\" or tirthankaras. For 10 points, name this faith divided into Svetambara and Digambara sects, a monastic Indian religion founded by Mahavira whose five vows include ahimsa, or non-violence.", "Jainism", "H"]
["The Hill of Vaws was a legendary meeting place for these people, who are celebrated in Spanish winter parades called cabalgatas. In Eastern Orthodoxy, the Great Blessing of Water is said on a feast remembering them. St. Eustorgius moved their relics to Milan, though Frederick Barbarossa had them moved again. In Germany, their initials are marked above doors in chalk by boys called Sternsinger, and their bones are allegedly in a gilded shrine in Cologne Cathedral. Legendarily, St. Thomas blessed them while en route to India. In the Gospel of Matthew, their words lead to the Massacre of the Innocents perpetrated by Herod. The names Caspar, Balthasar, and Melchior are often given to, for 10 points, what men celebrated on Epiphany, who bring gifts to baby Jesus after following a star?", "Magi", "H"]
["This portion of a larger text divides all living creatures into those that move on their bellies, and those that walk on two or four legs, claiming that all were made from water. It proclaims that victims of slander are automatically innocent, because evil words are of evil people, and good words are of good people. This segment claims that disbelievers are like thirsty people who stumble upon a mirage expecting to find water, but only find an unamused Allah staring back at them. According to this sura, men who are the sole witnesses of their wives' adultery will have four times as much weight be given to their testimonies. Alongside al-Azhab, the clearest scriptural mandate that women should wear the hijab is found in this sura, which is best known for a verse comparing Allah to a glass-enclosed (*) lamp spreading the title substance across the heavens and earth. For 10 points, name this twenty-fourth sura of the Qu'ran which describes the radiance of Allah.", "An-Nur", "H"]
["Jacob Molin unusually swayed his body while performing this action. Some people take three steps backwards, representing a retreat from the material world, followed by three steps forward before performing this action. On Shemini Atzeret, this practice is modified to take the incoming rainy season into account. The person performing this action has a four-cubit radius bubble which others are not supposed to breach, and must imitate Hannah's behavior in Samuel by being audible only to him or herself. During the Ten Days of Repentance, a reference in this ritual to \"the Holy King\" is substituted for \"the Holy God.\" The middle (*) thirteen components of this ritual, which is performed facing Jerusalem, are replaced with a single one for the Shabbat, during which an additional fourth \"Mussaf\" instance of this action is performed. This prayer consists of nineteen blessings which are recited three times a day by observant Jews. For 10 points, name this central \"standing\" prayer of Judaism.", "Amidah", "H"]
["The magician Uba-aner creates a wax animal of this kind that is seven fingers long, but has the ability to grow to seven cubits. The fragmentary Tale of the Doomed Prince abruptly breaks off after one of these animals offers to help save the prince from a dog, in exchange for aid against a demon. As punishment for his gluttony, a god of this animal had his tongue cut out. The Temple of Kom Ombo was home to several mummified examples of these animals, one of which, according to Diodorus Siculus, saved the King Menes. Some confusing myths report that Horus took this non-avian animal form to search for the pieces of Osiris, and others state that one of them (*) transported the dead body of Osiris to safety. A live, sacred example of these animals known as Petsuchos can be found in the sanctuary in the Fayyum province for a son of Neith and Set who had this animal form. That god with the head of this animal had a cult center in a city that the Greeks called \"this animal\" \"opolis.\" For 10 points, name this animal represented by Sobek, an apex predator that lives in the Nile river", "Nile crocodile", "H"]
["This man is considered the founder of a church whose first archbishop was allowed to sign his name in cinnabar, wear purple robes under his vestments, and hold an imperial scepter, as part of \"three privileges\" granted by the Emperor Zeno. This man was martyred by being dragged by a rope around his neck and then burned, according to his apocryphal Acts. The people of Lystra call this man Zeus, and refer to his companion as Hermes. According to Galatians, this man's decision to follow Peter's example and stop eating with Gentiles precipitated a dispute ending with him setting sail with John Mark for his old stomping grounds of (*) Cyprus, whose \"Orthodox Church\" he founded. This man is first encountered selling his land in Jerusalem and donating the proceeds to the Christian community there, but is soon tasked with overseeing missionary work at Antioch, a task that proves too much to handle alone, so this man sets out to Tarsus to seek out his best friend. For 10 points, name this traveling companion of Paul in Acts of the Apostles.", "Barnabas", "H"]
["Cable 243 was sent out in the wake of an incident in which members of this religion were attacked as soldiers confiscated an intact heart. Associated Press reporter Peter Arnett was punched on the nose while covering protests held by this religious group. Diplomats William Trueheart and Frederick Nolting disagreed about what to do about the mistreatment of people of this religion. Several members of this religion were shot for flying a flag with blue, yellow, red, white, and orange vertical stripes, and a sixth stripe consisting of all five of those colors, on Vesak day. The \"crisis\" named for this religion ended after two brothers were (*) executed at the back of an armored personnel carrier. The horrible woman Madame Nhu equated members of this religion with Communists. Malcolm Browne won a Pulitzer for his photograph of the death of a member of this religious group, Thich Quang Duc, by self-immolation. For 10 points, name this persecuted majority religion in South Vietnam during the presidency of the Catholic Ngo Dinh Diem.", "Buddhism", "H"]
["One of these addresses likens a charitable man banishing envy and anger to a powerful warrior destroying his enemies. Another of them ends with a Sith Code-like passage describing a man who \"conceives an aversion,\" and \"in conceiving this aversion, he becomes divested of passion, and by the absence of passion he becomes free, and when he is free he becomes aware that he is free.\" The third of these addresses claims that the ear, the nose, the tongue, the body, the mind, and the mind-consciousness are all on (*) fire. A torchlit procession known as the perehara occurs on Esala day, which commemorates the first of these addresses. The second one, which was about the nonexistence of the soul, transformed all who listened to it into arhats. Mahakashyapa was the only one to smile during a wordless address of this kind, whose deliverer merely held up a white lotus flower. The first of these addresses was delivered in Sarnath, and laid out precepts such as the Middle Way and the Four Noble Truths. For 10 points, name these liturgical orations delivered by Siddhartha Gautama.", "sermons of Buddha ", "H"]
["Adventists often recite a passage in this book that defends Sabbath observance as a \"shadow of the things that were to come.\" This book mentions another Jesus, who is referred to as \"Justus.\" The theological doctrine of mortification stems from this book's command to \"Put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly nature.\" The only mention of the lost Epistle to the Laodiceans occurs in this book. This book ends with a request to \"remember my chains,\" and unlike Ephesians, it commands husbands to \"love your wives, and do not be harsh with them,\" to accompany its request for wives to \"submit to your husbands.\" This book says that the \"son is the (*) image of the invisible God, for in him all things were created.\" This epistle is addressed to a congregation founded by Epaphras which was increasingly becoming more Gnostic and friendly toward pagan practice. For 10 points, name this Pauline epistle written to a city in Phrygia in Asia Minor, which precedes 1 Thessalonians in the New Testament.", "Epistle to the Colossians", "H"]
["This man suffered a mass desertion during a secret meeting under the \"Tree of Bad Counsel.\" After killing a commander named Richard Corfield, this man wrote the mocking poem \"The Death of Richard Corfield.\" This man scored a huge propaganda victory when he staged a raid on the garrison at Jijiga and recovered all of the camels that had been stolen from him. This man died unceremoniously of influenza in Ogaden after the Royal Air Force bombarded his capital at Taleh with impunity since his followers thought the planes were the chariots of Allah planning to take them up to heaven. This man was offended by the Christianity of the neighboring (*) Ethiopians, so he joined a radical Sufi order and proclaimed the \"Dervish State,\" which lasted until 1920. For 10 points, name this religious leader who gave the British hell in Somaliland, and received an alliterative nickname reflecting his fervor.", "Mohammed Abdullah Hassan", "H"]
["This man told an anecdote about a monkey that grows more restless as he drinks wine and gets stung by a scorpion, before saying \"the human mind is like that monkey.\" This man first learned of his master during a lecture on Wordsworth's poem The Excursion. The Scots-Irish social worker Margaret Elizabeth Noble studied under this man, who bestowed upon her a nickname meaning \"Dedicated to God.\" This man's teacher is the namesake of a \"Math\" monastic order as well as a philanthropic \"Mission.\" Meditation and homa fire rituals are performed on January 12 to celebrate World Youth Day, which marks this man's birthday. During his travels, this man carried only a water-pot, a staff, and copies of The (*) Imitation of Christ and The Bhagavad Gita. This man addressed the \"Sisters and Brothers of America\" in a speech before the 1893 Parliament of the World's Religions, in which he covered topics such as Vedanta and yoga. For 10 points, name this late nineteenth century Indian monk, the disciple of Ramakrishna, who popularized Hinduism throughout the world", "Swami Vivekananda", "H"]
["Objects are dipped in boiling water for purification practices in the \"ise-ryu\" type of this practice. Korean Buddhist monks perform a type of this activity known as seongmu. A dramyin is used in a form of this activity in Tibetan Buddhism paying homage to Padmasambhava, known as cham. Out of temples to Lord Jagannath arose a form of this practice known as Odissi, which along with bharat natayam is one of the \"eight\" classical types of this practice in India. The Shinto form of this practice, performed by women called miko and known as (*) kagura, commemorates the action Uzume performed to lure Amaterasu out of her cave. Hindus believe that Shiva Nataraja destroys the universe by performing this action. In Chinese culture, two people can perform this action in a lion's costume, and a lot more people can do it under a dragon costume, during Chinese New Year. For 10 points, name this religious practice in which people rhythmically move their bodies.", "Dance", "H"]
["A prophecy mentioned in this book states that the \"ships of Kittim\" will come from the west to attack Assyria and Eber. In this book, many people die after being bitten by non-flying fiery serpents, so God orders the creation of a brazen serpent atop a pole and promises that bitten people who gaze upon it will live. This book is the first to relate how two men went to the high places of Peor, Pisgah, and Baal, offering seven altars at each of them. Samuel Morse took his phrase \"What hath God wrought\" from this book. A man first mentioned in this book refuses to (*) curse the Israelites despite being ordered to do so by Balak, and mistreats his donkey until it is given the power of speech and complains. Of the twelve spies dispatched in this book, Caleb and Joshua report that Canaan is a land overflowing with milk and honey. The leprosy-afflicted Miriam and Aaron die in this book, in which Moses appoints Joshua his successor. For 10 points, name this fourth book of the Bible, which precedes Deuteronomy.", "Book of Numbers", "H"]
["This man is told about \"horses swifter than leopards, fiercer than wolves at dusk,\" belonging to men who \"collect captives like sand.\" The fact that \"the law is paralyzed, and justice never prevails,\" is the crux of this man's \"first complaint.\" According to the Zohar, this man was born to the childless woman of Shunem who had shown Elijah hospitality by letting him stay with her, because Elijah promised her that she will \"embrace a son,\" and this man's name is similar to the Hebrew word for \"embrace.\" This man, who uniquely among the prophets directly calls out God's inaction, is instructed by an angel to take some stew to Daniel in the lion's den in the story of \"Bel and the Dragon.\" Several of the Pauline epistles build on the idea found in this man's book that \"the (*) just shall live by his faith.\" That book contains an \"Oracle of Woe\" and a \"Psalm\" following this man's discussion with God. For 10 points, name this minor Old Testament prophet whose bald head led to Donatello's statue of him being nicknamed \"The Pumpkin.\"", "Habakkuk", "H"]
["A glass-less building of this type is located on the \"Singing Hill,\" or the \"Cerro Sonsonate.\" A home for the aged was added as a dependency of one of these buildings whose construction began during the Ten Years' Crusade. The first of these buildings was demolished and converted to a public park following a 1948 earthquake in Ashgabat. Nine intricately-carved quartz and Portland cement pillars are the key feature of a building of this kind designed by Louis Bourgeois. The official name for these buildings is \"Dawning-place of the praise of God,\" or (*) Mashriqu'l-Adhkar. The \"Greatest Name\" is engraved above each of the nine doors of the only building of this kind in North America, located in Wilmette, Illinois. The \"most visited building in the world\" is one of these clergy-less, tranquil structures consisting of twenty-seven marble \"petals\" arranged in groups of three, resembling a lotus flower, that is located in New Delhi. For 10 points, name these seven extant structures that serve as places for prayer for a tolerant monotheistic religion.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed House of Worship", "H"]
["In India and Pakistan, a style of performing this activity known as pani patti is taught. People performing this activity follow divisions known as hizb or manzil for convenience. Performers of this activity may run into situations known as nun sakinah, which they may resolve by \"concealment,\" \"merging,\" or conversion.\" People carrying out this activity generally follow the \"external manners\" and the \"manners of the heart.\" Qari are those who perform this activity competently, following the precept of tarteel, meaning \"with no haste.\" This activity is performed randomly as a test to see if people really are (*) hafizes. The rules governing the proper performance of this practice are known as tajwid, and specify that stop signs be followed, that the performer should have purity and clear his or her mind, and that he or she should not mumble. For 10 points, name this activity in which the words from the holy book of Islam are said out loud.", "2005 Quran desecration controversy", "M"]
["This man was baptized by Ananias of Damascus, and in one of his writings he says to \"put on the full armor of God\" to guard against the Devil. This man traveled extensively with Barnabas, and he wrote one well-known work with (*) \"Timothy our brother.\" In that work, he notes that without love, he is like a \"noisy gong\" or a \"crashing cymbal.\" This author of Ephesians and 1 Corinthians was responsible for holding the coats of those who stoned Saint Stephen. This man converted to Christianity after he was struck blind by God on the road to Damascus. For 10 points, name this biblical figure previously named Saul who wrote many epistles.", "Paul", "H"]
["Rabbinical scholars usually group this man with Jethro and Balaam as one of Pharaoh's advisors but debate when he lived, since no clues are given in the Bible. Part III of Handel's Messiah contains a hymn inspired by this man titled \"I Know That My Redeemer Liveth.\" The words of friendly (*) accusers against this man are contradicted by Elihu, who tries to comfort him after his lands in Uz are destroyed.\"The Lord giveth, and the lord taketh away\" is spoken by - for 10 points - what Biblical man, whose life is ruined by God in a test of faith?", "Job", "H"]
["A group from this denomination established a communalistic utopia in East Arabia and seized the Black Stone of the Ka'aba for twenty-three years. The Qarmatians belonged to this sect, as did a group who originated the word fida'i and briefly held Masyaf castle. A group of this sect that lived at the (*) fortress of Alamut was founded by Hassan-i Sabah; that group called themselves by a name popularly attributed to their drug use, the Assassins. The Nizaris are the largest branch of - for 10 points - what Shi'a sect which included the Seveners?", "Nuqtavi", "H"]
["This religion's creator deity was symbolized by the spine of a bovine. People in this religion had three souls, only one of which was immortal and could be transfigured after death. A reformer of this religion ordered an official regicide of old deities and composed the Great Hymn. In this religion, the rolling of (*) dung by beetles personified by Khepri symbolized the transition of the Sun, which was attacked by a serpent every night. Atenism was a monotheistic variety of - for 10 points - what religion that worshipped deities like Horus and Ra?", "", "H"]
["In Dzogchen, one of these phenomena may be observed around the dead body of someone who has achieved bodhi. Ezekiel's \"wheel within a wheel vision\" compares the radiance of God to these phenomena, one of which is created in Genesis 9. Borlung, Ngalyod, and Yingarna are names for a creature (*) named for these phenomena that created law during the Dreamtime. Alfred Radcliffe-Brown named the serpent worshipped by Aborigines after - for 10 points - what symbol put in the sky by God to symbolize the covenant after Noah's flood?", "Rainbow", "H"]
["The phrase \"every key has ridges\" is a famous response to the idea that this action is the key to paradise. Truthfulness, love, and certainty are three of the seven requirements for this action to be valid. This action is often referred to as kalima in South Asia. The second part of this action is an acknowledgment of (*) prophethood, or risalah. The flag of Saudi Arabia features the words said during this action, whose first part is a creed affirming tawheed. Converts to Islam perform - for 10 points - what testimony of the oneness of God?", "", "H"]
["Three pamphlets regarding this practice were published by Andreas Karlstadt. The Words of Institution are used to consecrate this practice, which is exemplified by Corinthians 11:23-25. Though they were originally linked, this practice diverged from a communal gathering called (*) agape. This practice was the subject of debates at the Marburg Colloquy about the Real Presence and transubstantiation. \"Do this in remembrance of me\" is a line inspiring - for 10 points - what practice of consuming bread and wine in remembrance of Christ?", "Eucharist", "H"]
["Some members of a community from this country practice a mystical tradition founded by Nowroji Shroff called Ilm-e-Khshnoom. Businessmen from that generally affluent group sponsor dastur priests who conduct most navjot rituals in this country, where most temples tending the sacred atar flame are located. A religion from this country is (*) divided over whether women can achieve salvation. After Iran, this country is home to the second-most Zoroastrians, including the Parsi community. For 10 points, name this country, also home to most Jains.", "", "H"]
["This is the last name of a Swiss philosopher who was banned from entering the U.S. until 2010, a man who wrote Western Muslims and the Future of Islam and teaches Oriental Studies at Oxford University. A form of retreat known as i'tikaf is most commonly practiced during a period of time with this name during which the (*) Night of Power occurs. During that period of time with this name, a sunset meal called iftar is consumed after observing sawm. For 10 points, identify this month during which Muslims must fast.", "Ramadan", "H"]
["This commander's uncle was a renowned swordsman who fought with an ostrich feather on his head and was called \"Lion of God.\" This commander's allies swore the Pledge of the Tree, helping lead to a ten-year peace concluded at the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah. This man withstood a fourteen-day siege by the forces of (*) Abu Sufyan at the Battle of the Trench, after which he suspected treason among the Jewish Qurayza tribe and had them executed. For 10 points, name this victor at the Battle of Badr, a leader of Medina who conquered Mecca.", "Muhammad", "H"]
["At the start of a two-week fast before a feast celebrating this figure, it was once custom to parade the True Cross through Constantinople. The most widely used of the Akathist hymns is dedicated to this figure. At the Council of Ephesus, Cyril and Nestorius debated a (*) title given to this figure. On August 15th, Orthodox Christians celebrate a feast celebrating a time during which this person slept called the Dormition. For 10 points, the title \"theotokos\" is given to what person by Orthodox Christians, since she bore Jesus?", "Mary, mother of Jesus", "H"]
["An iconic version of a text describing rituals during these events was created in 1932 by Maxwell House. Hands are washed twice during this event, the first instance of which occurs without blessing and is known as ur'chatz. Children are (*) encouraged to \"steal\" an object hidden during this event called the afikoman. The question \"why is this night different from all other nights?\" is asked during this event, as prescribed by the Haggadah. Lots of matzah gets eaten during - for 10 points - what ritual meal that kicks off Passover?", "", "H"]
["Thousands of tulsi leaves are required for one of these events dedicated to Satyanarayana. Typically, sherpa guides perform one of these events before attempting ascents of Everest. People typically prepare prasad for blessing during these events. The subject of this event, often represented by a murti, is invited into the home and given an asana, or seat, after which (*) he or she is typically offered water, food, flowers, and incense. On Diwali, Laskhmi is celebrated by - for 10 points - what type of Hindu devotional ceremony for a god?", "Puja (Hinduism)", "H"]
["This thing names a sura whose verses describe the Day of Judgment and tell the stories of 'Ad and Thamud to explain consequences of not heeding God, and which is named for a miracle in which this thing is split open. Some Christians claim that Allah is a pagan Arabian god of this, just like Hubal. After the (*) conquest of Constantinople, which had this object on its crest, it was adopted as an Islamic symbol. The Islamic calendar is based on this object's cycles. Islam is often symbolized by - for 10 points - a \"crescent\" representing what object?", "Moon", "H"]
["This religious group's style of music was first popularized in America in the 1970s by the Sabri brothers. The band Junoon popularized a style of rock based on the music of this religious group which is often played during the sema ceremony. Abida Parveen is a famous singer of this religious group's (*) qawwali music, which was also popularized by Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan. The ghazals of Hafez and Rumi were set to music by - for 10 points - what religious group, whose music accompanies the whirling of dervishes?", "Sufism", "H"]
["The practice of focusing on specific words in these texts called huatou was introduced by Dahui Zonggao. The concept of mu is often illustrated in these texts, as in one that asks whether a dog has a certain nature. Wumen Huikai made famous commentaries on these texts, which are compiled in (*) The Gateless Gate and The Blue Cliff Record. Hands clapping without making sound are discussed in one of these texts, which are used to test students in the Soto, Obaku, and Rinzai schools. For 10 points, name these stories used to teach Zen Buddhism.", "", "H"]
["This state is home to Matthew Barnett's Dream Center in Echo Park, near the former site of Life Bible College, which is the educational arm of a denomination founded in this state. In 2008, a Lake Forest megachurch in this state hosted the Civil Forum on the Presidency between John McCain and Barack Obama and was moderated by the author of The Purpose Driven Life. A Roman Catholic diocese in this state recently purchased the building where Robert Schuller hosted the Hour of Power; that building is a Philip (*) Johnson-designed glass church. Aimee Semple McPherson founded the Church of the Foursquare Gospel in a southern city in this state, which is home to the Rick Warren's Saddleback Community Church near Mission Viejo in Orange County. For 10 points, name this state, home to the Archdiocese of Los Angeles.", "California", "H"]
["A state prosecutor in Tomsk, Russia filed a petition to ban a commentary on this work for inciting hatred. This work explains worldly existence with the metaphor of a tree, which must be felled by the sword of detachment. Scholars like Ramanuja claim that this work has three divisions corresponding to karma, bhakti, and gnana yoga. A commentary titled for this work (*) \"As It Is\" was produced by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. This work forms adhyayas 25 through 42 of the Bhishma Parva of a larger work, and is set before the first day of fighting in the Kurukshetra War. It begins as the third Pandava expresses to his charioteer his hesitance to kill enemy soldiers. For 10 points, name this section of the Mahabharata in which Krishna explains the nature of dharma and reality to Arjuna.", "Bhagavad Gita", "H"]
["This woman gives information about the murderous conspiracy of the eunuchs Bigthan and Teresh. She invites the husband of Zeresh to a feast, which ends with that man and her caught in an incriminating position on a couch when her own husband enters. This person declares \"if I perish, I perish\" after being chastised for her potential silence by a relative. After obtaining her position when (*) Vashti is deposed, this cousin of Mordecai ends up marrying King Ahasuerus, who may actually be Xerxes I. She is honored on the 14th day of Adar. This woman's saving of her people from Haman is celebrated on Purim. For 10 points, name this Jewish woman who becomes queen of Persia in her namesake Old Testament book.", "Esther", "H"]
["The documentary False Fire investigated an incident in which five members of this religion supposedly committed suicide. \"Penetrating the Two Cosmic Extremes\" is one of the five ritual exercises of this religion. The 610 Office was created in response to the increasing popularity of this religion, which was the subject of the Kilgour-Matas report. It claims that the world is now in a period of (*) \"dharma rectification\", and its teachings are centered on the principles of \"truthfulness, benevolence, and forbearance\", or zhen, shan, and ren. Followers of this religion meditate in an attempt to achieve supernatural powers. For 10 points, name this qigong-based religion founded by Li Hongzhi, practitioners of which have had their organs harvested by the Chinese government.", "Falun Gong", "H"]
["This man's soul frightened the Angel of Death so much that Gabriel, Zagziel, and God descended from heaven and took it themselves. Millions of ants choked Og the Giant to death after this man stabbed him in the leg with a ten cubit spear. After Korah's uprising against this man, the earth opened and swallowed the conspirators Abiram and Dathan. This man rescued the seven daughters of his future father-in-law from water-thieving shepherds in (*) Midian. He turned his brother's staff into a serpent to prove God's power to to the ruler who kept this man's people captive in Goshen. This husband of Zipporah condemned the golden calf that the Israelites worshipped while he was on Mount Sinai receiving the Ten Commandments. For 10 points, name this Biblical figure who led the Israelite slaves from Egypt.", "Moses", "H"]
["One form of these things is believed to multiply through a process called peldung. Another one of these things is celebrated during the extravagant procession of the Esala Perahera festival. One type of these objects called rangsil are small pearl-like objects that often appear after cremation. In 1998, a bombing in Kandy targeted a temple that contains the most famous one of these religious objects in Sri Lanka. The sarira type of these objects are often placed in glass bowls in (*) stupas or in statues of a certain figure. These objects are venerated as means to cut short the cycle of reincarnation and to achieve the enlightenment described by their person of origin in his sermons and sutras. For 10 points, name these sacred objects in a certain religion believed to be remains of bodhisattvas or Siddhartha Gautama that include hair, bone, and teeth.", "Buddhist relics ", "H"]
["Edward Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire hypothesizes that this book's second ending was written and added during the Middle Ages. A Bart Ehrman essay presents this book's central character's anger is fundamental to his power. This book is the extant source in the two-source hypothesis. This book includes a two-part version of the encounter with the fig tree and is the only one to directly describe its central figure as \"a (*) carpenter\". This book opens by quoting the prophecy of a voice crying in the wilderness and its first chapter describes John baptizing someone in the River Jordan. Its original ending stops with disciples discovering the empty tomb, and it is the only synoptic gospel that lacks a birth narrative of Jesus. For 10 points, name this shortest canonical gospel, the source for Matthew and Luke.", "Gospel of Mark", "H"]
["An early leader of this group led a circle called the Holy Brotherhood, or Chevraia Kadisha. A leader of a subsect of this group enumerated the five levels of divine service in a book referred to as the Tanya. Most subgroups of this sect gather in meetings called tish, which are called by leaders often known as \"ADMOR\". After its founding, this sect was directly opposed by the Vilna Gaon and the rest of the (*) misnagdim. The highest poverty rate in the US is in a village dominated by this religious sect called Kiryas Joel. Male members of this sect wear a rekelech during the week and a bekishe on holidays, and like Yemenites, invariably wear payot, or sidelocks. It is divided into dynasties including Belz, Satmar, and the Crown Heights-headquartered Chabad, and it was founded by the Baal Shem Tov. For 10 points, name this mystical sect of Orthodox Judaism.", "Hasidic Judaism", "H"]
["This action is performed in an alternative version of the brit milah called the brit rechitzah. On a holiday whose common name refers to this action, the British monarch distributes small silver coins as alms to the elderly. The Moravian Lovefeast includes three ordinances, namely the Eucharist, an Agape feast, and this action. Jesus relates the Parable of the Two Debtors in the Book of Luke shortly after a sinful woman does this to him with her (*) hair. In 2013, Pope Francis broke from tradition by doing this for two women after a Mass. The name of Maundy Thursday refers to this action, which despite Peter's protestations was performed by Jesus to his disciples shortly after the Last Supper. For 10 points, identify this action, a symbol of hospitality involving the cleaning of one's lower extremities.", "Foot washing", "H"]
["One compilation of texts from this religion is divided into Three Grottoes with twelve chapters each. Initiates in this religion use a kind of alchemy called Neidan to develop an immortal spiritual body/ In this religion's cosmology, the undifferentiated wuji generates the differentiated taiji. Fundamental concepts in this religion are represented by eight (*) trigrams consisting of broken or unbroken lines. Humility, compassion, and frugality are the Three Treasures of this religion. This religion venerates the Eight Immortals, and its deities include the Three Pure Ones, which sometimes include the Jade Emperor. One member of this religion wondered if he was a man dreaming he was a butterfly or vice versa; that man was Zhuangzi. For 10 points, name this religion that emphasizes action through non-action, or wu wei, founded by Lao Tzu.", "Taoism", "H"]
["This man's knocks excite a servant named Rhoda, who forgets to open the door for him. In a famous outdoor speech, he noted it was \"only the third hour of the day\" in disputing accusations that people were drunk. This man was chastised after cutting the servant Malchus' ear off with his sword, and he once wept bitterly shortly after being recognized because of his (*) Galilean accent. He reportedly was crucified upside down to avoid comparisons to his master. This person was asked three times if he loved Jesus, a reference to his denying of Christ three times on the night Jesus was betrayed. He was called the \"rock of my church\" by Jesus. For 10 points, name this disciple of Jesus who is traditionally considered the first pope.", "Saint Peter", "H"]
["This passage rhetorically asks \"Can any one of you by worrying add a single hour to your life?\" A large part of this passage consists of the phrase \"You have heard it said,\" followed by a prescription from Mosaic Law, then the phrase \"but I say unto you,\" followed by a refutation of the prescription. The final verse of this passage beseeches listeners to \"Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.\" This passage discards the metaphor of people being the (*) \"salt of the earth\" in favor of them being \"the light of the world.\" The declaration \"Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth\" is one of this passage's Beatitudes. For 10 points, name this section of the Book of Matthew, an oration Jesus delivered at an elevated place.", "Sermon on the Mount", "H"]
["It's not Orthodox Christianity, but the Supreme Patriarch is the head of this major religious branch in one country, where illicitly-ordained women known as mae ji face discrimination. The \"Forest Tradition\" within this branch forsakes scriptural study for wilderness asceticism. The insight meditation, or vipasanna, movement in this tradition advocates focusing on the three marks of existence. This branch holds up the (*) arahant as an ideal, and stresses that it is nearly impossible for laypeople to become them. In this tradition, the Vinaya, Sutta, and Abhidhamma Pitakas, or \"baskets,\" make up the Pali Canon, or Tripitaka. For 10 points, name this \"Way of the Elders,\" a branch of Buddhism predominant in Southeast Asia, but with fewer practitioners than Mahayana.", "Theravada", "H"]
["The Birmingham Temple in Michigan was established by a rabbi with this surname, the founder of Humanistic Judaism. The Chaldeans, the Medes, the Greeks, and the Romans are each represented by a serving of this substance. It is permissible for non-observant Hews to handle the mevushal type of this substance. The words \"boreh p'ri ha-gafen\" are said during the kiddush blessing, recited over this substance during the Friday night of (*) Shabbat. For each of the ten plagues, a drop of this substance is spilled during the seder. It's not matzo, but Manischewitz supplies most of the \"kosher\"type of this substance. For 10 points, name this alcoholic beverage important to many Jewish rituals.", "Wine", "H"]
["One instance of this activity is performed until the first star is seen in the evening sky, and is called the \"Paramony,\" or \"Preparation.\" Some Pentecostals practice the particularly severe \"Black\" type. Isaiah 58:6-7 rebukes Israel for not performing the \"acceptable\" type of this activity by caring for the poor and oppressed. By preaching that this activity should not be mandatory, (*) Huldrych Zwingli kickstarted the Reformation in Switzerland. The four main seasons for this activity in Christianity include three named for the Dormition, the Nativity, the Apostles, and one starting on Ash Wednesday in which people often give up a luxury in lieu of performing this action. For 10 points, name this activity performed for forty days during Lent by not eating meat.", "Fasting", "H"]
["The instigator of this event describes angels that \"lift you up in their hands, so that you will not strike your foot against a stone.\" After this event ends, it is noted that \"angels came and attended\" its subject. Milton's Paradise Regained dramatizes this event from the Gospel of Luke, which ends when its subject declares \"Do not put the Lord your God to the test.\" The narrative of this event immediately follows that of the (*) baptism of Jesus, and occurs after Jesus spends forty days fasting in the desert. During this event, Jesus is instructed to turn stones into bread, to leap off of the highest point of the temple, and to bow down and worship the devil. For 10 points, identify this event in which the devil attempts to influence Jesus to sin.", "Killing Is My Business... and Business Is Good!", "H"]
["One thinker from this non-Greek tradition defended the immortality of the soul in Phaedon and was part of this tradition's enlightenment or Haskalah. Another philosopher of this religion criticized the methods, but not the conclusions, of the Kalam school in a treatise whose third book begins with an exegesis of a passage about a chariot. That book argued that the God of this religion can only be described by what he is (*) not and attempted to reconcile Aristotelianism with this religion. The Tractatus Theologico-Politicus disputed this religion's claim to chosenness. The Guide for the Perplexed was written by a member of this religion, Maimonides. For 10 points, name this religion from which Baruch Spinoza was expelled for denying the divine origins of the Torah.", "Judaism", "H"]
["The Landmarkists held that this sect maintained an unbroken line of continuity since Apostolic times. The issue of whether or not to adhere to a Calvinist soteriology divides the \"General\" and \"Reformed\" sects within this denomination. This denomination believes in soul competency, two church offices, and two ordinances: the Lord's Supper and the (*) \"believer's\" form of a certain practice. The first congregation of this denomination in North America was established in Providence by Roger Williams. In 2012, Fred Luter was elected as the first African American president of the Southern Convention of this denomination, the largest Protestant group in the US. For 10 points, name this denomination that advocates performing the namesake sacrament by total immersion.", "Baptists", "H"]
["This man promoted the use of his family's heraldic crest, consisting of grey wolves flanking a cooking pot. This man traced the turning point in his life to when he read a book by Ludolph of Saxony in his family's meager library. That happened while this man recovered from a botched surgery after suffering a leg wound at the siege of Pamplona. This man advocated going on a month-long secular retreat while reading his book of (*) prayers and meditations, and penned a set of Constitutions excluding female participation in his order and making his disciples swear allegiance to the Pope. Francis Xavier continued this man's work by leading missions into Asia. For 10 points, name this author of Spiritual Exercises, the founder of the Jesuits.", "Ignatius of Loyola", "H"]
["The mother of all of these animals is often pictured on posters with mountains making up her legs and gods making up her eyes and shoulders.The earth-goddess Prithvi, who worked with Prithu to overcome a famine, took this animal form. These animals are washed and decorated in temples on the eighth day of the month of Kartika, a holiday known as Gopastami. The (*) excrement of these animals is used as a fuel in many pujas, and is one of this animal's \"five products,\" along with ghee. A white, male example of these animals is the mount of Shiva and is named Nandi. The Law of Manu, Rig Veda, and Mahabharata all prohibit killing this animal. For 10 points, name these animals that are sacred in Hinduism.", "Cattle", "H"]
["Once every twelve years in several of these structures, a ceremony is performed during which a heavenly silver wire enters a granite sculpture. Most of these structures follow an 8-by-8 or a 9-by-9 square grid plan. The inner sanctum of these places is known as the \"womb chamber,\" and is often directly underneath a spire called the vimana. The term (*) prasada refers to both these buildings and to the refreshments served inside them after services. People remove their shoes before entering these religious structures, which contain murtis, or idols, of deities like Lakshmi or Ganesh. For 10 points, name these places of worship for the predominant religion in India.", "Hindu temple", "H"]
["One nutso offshoot of this religion, whose name means \"Great Source,\" venerates L. L. Zamenhof (ZA-men-hoff), the creator of Esperanto, as a god. \"Love of Nature\" and \"Tradition of the Family\" are two of the Four Affirmations of this religion, whose rituals include a ceremony often used to pacify the vengeful spirits of \"water children.\" Holy days in this religion include November 15th, during which parents take their children aged (*) 3, 5, and 7 to a shrine to pray for good fortune. Statues which resemble dogs and lions guard over shrines in this religion, which feature tiny buildings called sessha and sacred inner buildings called honden (HAWN-den). A sacred site in this religion is rebuilt every twenty years and can be found at Ise (EE-say). Oomoto is a sect of this religion that features shrines called jinja (JIN-juh) where kami (KAH-mee) are venerated. For 10 points, name this animistic religion of Japan.", "Shinto", "H"]
["One passage in this work compares those living in darkness to those living in light, saying that the latter have an obligation to expose the futile deeds of the former. The author of this works refers to himself as a \"prisoner,\" and urges his readers to live lives worthy of the calling they have received. The doctrine of predestination finds support mainly in the opening remarks of this work, which states \"we were chosen in Him before the creation of the world.\" This work concludes by admonishing the subjects to don various (*) metaphorical pieces of armor, including the belt of truth and shield of faith. The line, \"Do not let the sun go down on your anger\" is taken from the fourth chapter of this work, which also urges early Christians to refrain from bitterness, slander, and malice. For 10 points, name this Pauline epistle written to its namesake church located in modern-day Turkey.", "Aus tiefer Not schrei ich zu dir, BWV 38", "H"]
["A ritual in one ceremony of this religion is performed clockwise in times of peace and counterclockwise in times of war. A member of this religion started the Suffering People's Party. One set of rules in this religion is used to increase a life-force called \"livity.\" An early preacher of this religion is known as the \"Gong Guru\" and wrote The Promise Key; that adherent is Leonard Howell. An important text in this religion is divided into four books of Althyi. Fish over a foot long and added salt are discouraged in this religion's (*) I-tal diet. This religion, which contains three sects called \"mansions\" and venerates a text called The Holy Piby, contrasts the fallen modern world \"Babylon\" with the utopian \"Zion\" and reveres Marcus Garvey as a prophet . For 10 points, name this religion that venerates Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie and smokes a lot of Ganja.", "Rastafari", "H"]
["During this event, women participants have their hair braided into three braids. Women can use up to five pieces of cloth during this event, while men traditionally use three. Same-gendered family members perform ghusl on the participant in this event at least three times, but can continue for any number of odd times. The prayer for this event has no bowing or prostration but, like the Eid prayer, has an additional four takbirs (tuck-BEERZ). That prayer takes place in an auxiliary room or courtyard, but cannot take place in a (*) mosque itself. Some women must observe the iddah after this event for four months and ten days, during which they cannot interact with na-mahram. The Salat al-Janazah (sal-AT al-juh-NAAZ-uh) prayer is performed during this event. Kafan is the use of an inexpensive white cloth in preparation for this event, which involves placing three handfuls of soil into the ground perpendicular to the qiblah (KEY-bluh). For 10 points, name this event which must be undertaken immediately after death in Islam.", "Funeral", "H"]
["[Note to moderator (DON'T READ THIS OUT LOUD): pronounce the word \"Orixas\" carefully, like ore-ICKS-uh] The first saint born in this nation was known for healing people using \"paper pills\" and was called Anthony of Saint Anne. One religion primarily practiced in this country was founded by a follower of Allan Kardec who at 17 years old claimed to speak to a spirit called \"Father Anthony\". The primate of this nation is currently Murillo Ramos Krieger. In 2009, a nine-year old in this nation faced automatic excommunication for aborting a pair of twins, according to archbishop (*) Jose Sobrinho. The largest Marian shrine in the world is located in this nation, and is devoted to Our Lady of Aparecida. A mixture of indigenous beliefs and Catholicism in this nation created a religion which venerates ancestors as Egum and believes in spirits spelled with the letter \"x,\" called Orixas; that religion is Candomble. For 10 points, name this country, in which one celebrates Carnival.", "Brazil", "H"]
["This religion practices a Sabbath that occurs every 8 days, called the Day of Settlement and Attendance. Members of this religion believe that all humans will become immortal in the spirit world after death and hold funerals called \"ascension and harmony\" ceremonies. This religion's scripture contains a section called \"Introduction to Restoration\" which outlines a procedure for cancelling out sins with good deeds called indemnity; that scripture is called the (*) Divine Principle. In one ceremony from this religion, whose leaders are called the \"True Family,\" participants strike each other three times in order to reverse the fall of Adam and Eve and to become part of God's sinless lineage; that ceremony involves large numbers of couples marrying. For 10 points, name this church formerly headed by Sun Myung Moon.", "Unification Church", "H"]
["A translation of this work by Anquetil du Perron (AHN-kay-tee dew pair-OHN) were based on a Persian copy called \"The Great Secret.\" Several sections of this text contain the doctrine of the five fires and the two paths, which include the Path of the Gods and the Path of the Fathers. A set of four sayings contained in this work emphasizes the existence of both the soul and the self, and includes the phrase \"that thou art\"or (*) tat tvam asi. This text declares that the universe is the result of the interaction of the eternal Purusha and transient Prakti, resulting in all of the universe being illusion, or Maya. There exist 10 principal examples of these texts, by which Arthur Schopenhauer (SHOW-pen-HOW-ur) was influenced to write The World as Will and Representation. For 10 points, name this set of 108 commentaries on the Vedas, a central text of Hinduism.", "Upanishads", "H"]
["One set of sayings of this man includes \"the more flesh, the more worms\" and \"the more women, the more witchcraft.\" At the beginning of his training, this man sat on the roof and listened to lessons through the skylight, and almost froze to death doing so. In one dispute, this man asserted that a woman could remarry even if her husband's death was uncertain, and also stated that one should tell an ugly bride she is beautiful on her wedding day. This man stated \"what is hateful to you, do not do to your fellow\" while (*) standing on one foot to explain the Torah. This man's sayings include the admonition \"if not now, when?\" in regards to duty. This scholar is best remembered today for his debates with Shammai (shah-MY), and for his namesake sandwiches eaten on Passover. For 10 points, name this Rabbi who lends his name to college campus Jewish organizations.", "Hillel the Elder", "H"]
["One of these figures had a companion who was sawed in half, but the two halves of that companion's body continued to recite scriptures. Another one proved his abilities to a scholar by successfully ordering an illiterate water carrier to recite religious verses. A group of texts about the life of one of the figures has a name literally meaning \"birth stories\" and includes the tale of his four journeys, called Udasis (oo-DAH-sees), and an anecdote about a cobra (*) shading him from the sun. The first of these people taught the practice of repeatedly changing God's name to control the five evils, while the 10th one laid down the practices of the 5 Ks, created the Khalsa order, and was named Gobind Singh. For 10 points, name these figures which include Tegh Bahadur (teg BAH-hah-duur), Angad, and Nanak, the spiritual leaders of Sikhism.", "Sikh gurus", "H"]
["Upon ascending the throne, this ruler ordered his father's premier military general to be killed as punishment for murdering two other generals during peacetime. This ruler's son stated that though his father treated civilians harshly, he would treat them even more harshly, a statement that instigated the schism between Judah and the remaining tribes of Israel. In a bout of depression, this man wrote, \"Everything is meaningless! There is nothing (*) new under the sun.\" During the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus admonished his disciples not to worry, stating that not even this person in all his splendor was not dressed as beautifully as a lily of the field. In a famous case, this man ordered a baby to be cut in two to determine the identity of the baby's mother. For 10 points, name this third king of Israel, the son of David, who asked for wisdom from God and wrote the book of Proverbs.", "Solomon", "H"]
["The story of a group of three of these people is told in the parable of the People of Ya-Sin. One text asserts that over 124,000 of these people exist, though the names of only around 25 of them are known. One of these people was marked with a mole called the Shama'il. The final one of these people is known as the Khatam an-Nabiyyin (na-bee-een), or the \"seal\" of these people. Belief in these people is the fourth of the six articles of faith. The Ahmadiyya (akh-muh-DEE-uh) sect controversially believes (*) Mirza Gulam Ahmad to be one of these people. When these people's names are spoken, it is customary to add the phrase \"peace be upon him\" afterwards. The final one of these people achieved this status after meditating in a cave on Mount Hira when Jibreel appeared to him. For 10 points, name this title shared by Musa, Adem, Isa, and Muhammad, a title given to those charged by Allah to preach Islam.", "Prophet", "H"]
["On one day of this holiday, people typically greet each other with pitka tava and the entire book of Psalms is read. On a holiday following this one, it is a Chabad (shah-BAHD) custom to end the service with \"And Jacob went on his way.\" The last day of this holiday has a ritual commemorating the water libation. Seven \"exalted guests\" representing seven shepherds of Israel, called the (*) ushpizin (ush-PEE-zin), are invited on this holiday. Samaritans commemorate this holiday by building a trellis and going to Mount Gezerim (GEZ-uh-reem), and it is the first pilgrimage festival after Rosh Hashanah. This holiday is followed by a day on which Geshem is recited, Shemini Atzeret (sheh-MEE-nee aht-ZAIR-et). The Lulav and Etrog, two of the four species, are waved on this holiday, and the structure used on this holiday notably does not have to permit starlight. For 10 points, name this festival of booths.", "Sukkot", "H"]
["One of these works tells of a group of vine-dressers who kills the owner's son so that they can keep a greater share of the profits from the harvest. In another of these works, a group of laborers are disgruntled at their employer because he pays all his employees the same wage regardless of how long they have been working. A better known one depicts an architect who built his house on (*) stone, and another who built his house on sand. In another of these, a son demands money from his father and spends it all on prostitutes and gambling before returning home in shame, yet is welcomed back with open arms. For 10 points, name these stories, one of which depicts a Jew who was beaten nearly to death and was ignored by a priest and rabbi before receiving help from a Samaritan.", "Parables of Jesus", "M"]
["Those who undergo this ritual are given an inscribed ring in the Baha'i faith if they are over the age of fifteen. In Judaism, tahara is performed by a chevra kadisha for this ritual, and the Tziduk Hadin is recited. In Tibet, juniper incense is burned to attract Dakinis for the \"sky\" type of this event. Catholics traditionally perform this ritual with subject's head facing the West, although this custom is rarely observed. In many South Asian religions, such as Sikhism, Jainism, and Hinduism, the person involved in this ceremony is cremated. For 10 points, name this ceremony where a deceased person is laid to rest.", "Burial", "M"]
["King Suddhodana locked this man in a palace for twenty-nine years to prevent a version of a prophecy given by a hermit seer. In the garden of Lumbini, this man emerged from under the right arm of a woman who dreamed about a white six-tusked elephant. The first sermon by this man was delivered at Deer Park after he discovered suffering in the form of a sick man, a corpse, and an ascetic. Asita prophesied that this man would become a sage or ruler before this man discovered the Middle Way. For 10 points, give the name of this \"awakened one\" who achieved enlightenment while sitting under a Bodhi tree, the founder of Buddhism.", "Gautama Buddha", "M"]
["One practitioner of this religion wrote a poem separating the comprehension of reality into five ranks. A legendary pioneer of this religion allegedly gazed at a wall for nine years, and was nicknamed the \"Blue-Eyed Barbarian.\" That figure's likeness is featured in Daruma dolls. Another revered event within this belief system consists merely of a man holding a white lotus and smiling, and is known as the Flower Sermon. Adherents of this religion, which was practiced by Bodhidharma, attempt to reach satori, and it uses paradoxical koans for self-inquiry. For 10 points, name this sect of Buddhism that focuses on seeking enlightenment through meditation.", "Zen", "M"]
["A text in this religion comprising biographies of holy figures is the Kalpa Sutra, and this religion's followers chant the Namokar mantra. A sect of this religion believes that Mallinatha was a woman and fasts during Paryushana. Asteya and satya are two of five vows taken by adherents of this faith, who also follow ratnatraya or the \"three jewels.\" Rishabha is the first of 24 \"ford makers\" or tirthankaras of this religion, which is divided into the Svetambara sect and the Digambara or \"sky clad\" sect. Mahavira is the last tirthankara of, for 10 points, what religion founded in India whose followers practice ahimsa, or nonviolence?", "Jainism", "M"]
["Josephus's Testimonium Flavianum gives an early account of this event, though Tacitus's description is considered to have more historical value. During this event, earthquakes opened the graves of dead saints, and a temple veil was torn in two. Before this event, a crowd demanded for the release of Barabbas, and it took place on a geological formation vaguely resembling a skull. Simon of Cyrene helped carry a large burden for this event's central figure, who is dressed in a purple robe and a crown of thorns. For 10 points, name this event commemorated by Good Friday, that was ordered by Pontius Pilate.", "Crucifixion of Jesus", "M"]
["In this religion, the Sedreh undergarment and Kushti girdle are given to children when they come of age. An important concept in this faith is the distinction between asha and druj, or truth and falsehood. This faith's sacred texts include the liturgical Visperad and the Vendidad, which teaches self-protection against evil spirits. In this religion, the dead are sometimes eaten by vultures when they are placed on towers of silence, and its temples always contain an everlasting fire. This religion's seventeen core hymns are collected in the Avesta. For 10 points, name this ancient dualistic Persian religion whose creator god is Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["This man's remains were moved to the land of Shechem after the Exodus, fulfilling a promise to his father that he would be buried in his homeland. This man's son Manasseh was blessed before his other son Ephraim, and in his youth, this man placed a silver cup into Benjamin's grain sack to frame him for stealing. After being accused of raping Potiphar's wife, this man predicted the fates of a cupbearer and baker in prison. Sold into slavery in Egypt, he eventually became a vizier after foretelling a famine from Pharaoh's dream of fat and skinny cows. For 10 points, name this favorite son of Jacob who wore a multicolored coat.", "Joseph", "M"]
["In this volume of the Old Testament, a man comments that he was birthed from his mother naked, and that's how he will die. This book compares the futility of questioning God to taming the beasts Behemoth and Leviathan. Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar are friends of the title character of this book, who comfort him for seven days and try and justify his punishment by saying that he sinned. After the devil causes a man to lose all his worldly possessions and break out in sores, his wife tells him to \"curse God and die.\" For 10 points, name this book of the Bible where God test the piety of the title figure.", "Book of Job", "M"]
["On the second day of this annual festival, the verbal counting of 50 days known as the Omer begins. The traditional meal that is eaten in celebration of this festival takes 15 steps that are parallel to the 15 Psalms known as the Shir HaMa'alot. Other parts of the meal eaten during this holiday festival include karpas and maror. Children look for the afikoman after the seder in this event, and the youngest child traditionally asks the Four Questions. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday commemorating the freedom of the Israelites from Egypt, in which Jews are required not to eat leavened bread and instead traditionally eat matzah.", "Passover", "H"]
["A symbol and barbed wire is the logo for yellow versions of these objects created by FJMC. Participants look at their fingernails after blessings on a spice box, cup of wine, and this item, before it is dipped in the wine when three stars appear in the sky to end the weekly Havdalah ritual, which uses a braided version of this item. After placing one of these items at a different height from the (*) others into a larger object near a window, Ma'oz tzur is often sung following two prayers. Women wave over these objects, cover their eyes, and say \"Lehadlik ner\" Fridays at sundown. During the shiva mourning period, this object lasts for 7 days, and on the anniversary of a person's death, the Yahrzeit (\"yort-site\") version lasts 24 hours. One called shamash is used with eight others in an eight-day festival. For 10 points, name these items added to a menorah each day of Hanukkah and kindled.", "Candle", "H"]
["This man attempted to explain the meaning of the word Sharas, and divided history into god's goodness and God's castigations in his compilation of commentaries called the Harmony of the Law. William Pringle's One Hundred Aphorisms is a summary of one of this man's works that discusses contemporary Anti-Trinitarians. Much of this man's work was collected by his student, Theodore (*) Beza. The preface to one of this man's works compares \"custom\" versus truth, and makes a plea to Francis I to help the Huguenots. In that work, this man claimed that the grace of God is the only possible way to salvation and claimed St. Augustine was the source for his idea of predestination. For 10 points, name this author of The Institutes of the Christian Religion, a prominent theologian in Geneva during the Reformation.", "John Calvin", "H"]
["7. E. G. Browne was a noted commentator on this religion. Two stars surround a line with three bands in a symbol of this religion commonly worn on jewelry. One holiday in this religion celebrates a man who heard nightingales and received a lot of roses during twelve days in a garden. This faith is overseen by a council of Chief Stewards called the \"Hands of the Cause.\" The calendar of this faith is broken into (*) Vahids. This faith gained many converts from Shaykhism, and Local Spiritual Assemblies lead this religion's feasts that occur every 19 days. Holy books in this religion include The Epistle to the Son of the Wolf and the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas. For 10 points, name this religion started by the B\u00e1b and led by Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h, whose other holy books include the Book of Certitude.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["4. A religion in this country includes halls for feminism and masculinity in their Temples of Humankind, which were built underground. That religion in this country is named for Horus's city of worship, Damanhur. The tilting of a vile occurs during a major religious festival in this modern-day country, during which the namesake saint's dried blood is believed to turn into liquid. A religious figure from this country is sometimes referred to as \"The Father of Church-Song\" for his namesake hymns. That man advocated for voluntary virginity and was the (*) mentor to Saint Augustine. An epistle addressed to a city in this nation contains the quote \"the wages of sin is death\" and follows Acts of the Apostles as the first epistle in the Bible. For 10 points, name this home of Saint Ambrose, and in whose capital city Peter became the first pope.", "Italy", "H"]
["In Leviticus, Moses is commanded to place this many loaves of bread on a table of pure gold before God. According to Exodus, this is the number of stones in the breastplate of the High Priest of the Israelites. A scared group of this number says that they feel like grasshoppers compared to the men in a certain place after Moses tells them to spy on (*) Canaan. This is the number of gates and foundation stones in the New Jerusalem according to the Book of Revelation. Jacob had this number of sons leading to groups like the Danites and the Levites. For 10 points, give this number of tribes of Israel and number of disciples of Jesus.", "12 (number)", "H"]
["In the book of Judges, Gideon heard a description of a dream in which this item rolled into the camp of Midian and toppled a tent. Before she is raped in 2 Samuel, Tamar brings Ammon this item. Prior to the siege of Jerusalem, this item was to be prepared using cow dung in place of human excrement. The use of this item caused two disciples en route to Emmaus to recognize Jesus. In Exodus, the appearance of evening quail and (*) dew preceded the appearance of this substance. Jesus was tempted by the devil to turn rocks into this substance, while five units of this substance were used along with two fish to feed a crowd of five thousand people. For 10 points, name this substance that accompanied wine in the Last Supper.", "Bread", "H"]
["In this city, one figure reasons with Jews in the Hall of Tyrannus, and handkerchiefs and aprons touched by that figure are used to cure the sick in this city. In a letter written in this city, the author compares the dead being raised to fighting with wild beasts in this city. In Acts, Demetrius warns other silversmiths in this city that Paul may ruin their trade based in this city's massive Temple of Artemis. One work addressed to this place asks the reader to \"take the (*) helmet of salvation and the sword of the spirit\" as well as combat the devil's schemes by putting on the \"full armor of God.\" The epistle addressed to this city asks children to obey their parents, husbands to obey their wives, and slaves to obey their masters. For 10 points, name this city, the namesake of an epistle that follows Galatians, a city in modern-day Turkey.", "Ephesus", "H"]
["During this period, a golden rose is blessed and the \"O\" Antiphon prayers are sung. Charles Borromeo wrote an influential letter titled for the \"meaning of\" this period. The Novena to Saint Andrew is said every day during this period since its start is determined by the date of the Feast of St. Andrew. Clement XI's bull Commissi Nobis Divinitus established the Feast of the (*) Immaculate Conception to be during this period. Gaudete Sunday occurs during this season, and on that day candles are changed to pink from purple. A Jesse Tree is decorated during this season, and children frequently receive small gifts such as candy after removing a date on this period's namesake calendars. For 10 points, name this period consisting the time from the start of December until Christmas Eve.", "Advent", "H"]
["The founder of the Morshediyya order, Kazeruni, supposedly believed that this city contained the only halal grain. While allegedly hiding from the Assassins in this city, al-Ghazali wrote Deliverance From Error. A man discovers a sidra tree during a trip in which that man visits this city. The qibla originally (*) faced this city, where a former trash dump was converted into a building site by Abd al-Malik. This city was the location of the \"Furthest Mosque,\" which was visited while one man was riding a donkey-mule combination called al-Buraq. That visit is detailed in \"The Star\" sura, as this city was the destination of Muhammad's Night Journey. For 10 points, name this city, the location of the Temple Mount, the Dome of the Rock, and the Western Wall.", "Jerusalem", "H"]
[". Initiates in one religion founded in this country receive green and white clothes as part of the \"Garb\" ceremony. The founder of a different religion in this country received visions of a \"Half-Indian Peasant of the Seven Crossroads\" and in another religion based in this nation, members attempt to gain axe' through the beating of drums. The main cathedral in the capital of this country contains sixteen (*) parabolas reaching towards the sky to resemble fingers. In a religious festival in this country, people walk around in blocos and are led by King Momo during a time period known as the Entrudo. During that festival, people sometimes dance the samba and dress up in costume. For 10 points, name this home of the Umbanda and Candomble religions, as well as the Carnival festival.", "Brazil", "H"]
["This religious sect's Sunday services consist of \"Bible lesson sermons\" on twenty-six topics which are studied twice per year. This sect's six tenets refer to Jesus Christ as the \"Way-Shower,\" and hold that he came to Earth to destroy the belief in sin and demonstrate the unreality of physical matter. Much of the day to day government of this church is controlled by a constitution called the Manual of the Mother Church. Members of this sect practice absent (*) treatment, in which people are prayed for from far away. This sect, which is known for its many reading rooms, grew out of an 1875 book partially titled for the \"key to the scriptures\" and is based in Boston. For 10 points, name this Christian sect founded by Mary Baker Eddy, who believed that illness could be cured with prayer alone.", "Christian Science", "H"]
["17. People carrying out this action in Sabarimala must first observe a 41 day vratham. The Ganga Jal is carried during the Kanvar Yatra in one of these actions. Dharamshalas are created to aid those involved in this action. A spilled pot filled with the liquid of immortality names a festival that occurs concurrently with this action; that is the (*) Kumbha Mela festival, the largest one of these. This action is performed in the Sapta Puri, which includes the sites of Ayodhya and Mathura. People carrying out this action may visit the Jyotirlingam in the Kashi Vishwanath Temple in Varanasi. For 10 points, name this action that in its most famous form involves bathing in the Ganges, in which people travel to religious sites.", "Hindu pilgrimage sites", "H"]
["In Theosophy, enlightened beings are said to belong to a \"Great Brotherhood\" of this color. According to the Book of Revelation, judgment is entered from a great throne of this color. A hymn called the Exsultet is sung by Catholic priests after they bring in the large paschal candle of this color, which stays lit throughout Easter and on special occasions afterward. In Hinduism, this is the standard color worn by (*) mourners. In Judaism, this is the customary color worn by Rabbis and their congregations on Yom Kippur. In Jainism, the Svetambara sect is named for their practice of wearing robes of this color. In Islam, the term \"ihram\" refers to the clothes of this color that pilgrims wear on the Hajj. For 10 points, name this color which represents yang in Taoism in contrast to the blackness of yin.", "White", "H"]
["The Gospel of Luke tells the story of a Pharisee with this name who invites Jesus to eat in his house but is rebuked for his lack of hospitality. That character is sometimes conflated with a leper of this name who appears in Matthew and Mark as a homeowner in Bethany. The apostle with this name is generally depicted carrying a saw because tradition holds he was martyred by being sawed in half. That apostle was known as (*) \"the Zealot.\" This name is attributed to the native of Cyrene who was forced by the Romans to carry the cross to the crucifixion. Another man with this name offered to buy the powers of the Holy Spirit from the apostles, lending his name to the practice of purchasing church offices. For 10 points, give this name of a \"Magus,\" which was also the original name of Saint Peter.", "Simon", "H"]
["One ritual practiced by this tradition involved setting an elaborate banquet and clearing it away without eating a bite. Candidates for admission into this sect were required to observe five years of silence. An early adherent of this tradition was the slave Zalmoxis, who went on to become the chief god of the Getae. Its founder was known for miracles like predicting the number of fish to be caught in a net and appearing in two cities at the same time. Maxims such as \"Eat not the heart\" and \"Do not stir fire with a sword\" were known as \"symbols\" and were followed by this sect. Its members practiced vegetarianism because of their belief in (*) metempsychosis, or the transmigration of souls into other animals. Other attributes of this Croton-based tradition include communal property and a prohibition against eating beans. For 10 points, name this Ancient Greek sect which taught the mathematical nature of reality.", "Pythagoreanism", "H"]
["In one story, this man's blood is mixed with clay and used to heal the eye of a king. He converts eight thousand men in the city of Lycia when he plants his staff in the ground and it flowers and grows fruit. Archers fail to execute this man when their arrows hang in the air near his flesh. Originally called Reprobus, this Canaanite served a knight who pretended to be the devil until that knight betrayed the fact that he was afraid of the cross. This (*) seven-foot tall saint is depicted in Orthodox art with the head of a dog. Medals depicting this man are frequently displayed in automobiles. In his most famous story, this saint helps an impossibly heavy child after devoting his life to carrying travelers across a dangerous river. For 10 points, name this patron saint of travelers whose name means Christ-Bearer.", "Saint Christopher", "H"]
["In one ritual on this holiday, an unleavened piece of bread called an \"opatek\" is broken by the oldest family member before being passed around. In Lithuania, the meal eaten on this holiday is called \"kucios\" and is left out all night to appease the spirits of the dead. In Ireland, the bells rung on this holiday are called the Devil's Funeral. The Italian tradition of eating twelve different types of seafood on this holiday spawned the Italian-American (*) Feast of the Seven Fishes. The Polish feast of Wigilia is held on this holiday, It is commonly celebrated with church services in which each member of the congregation holds a candle and passes the flame to his neighbor, often while singing \"Silent Night.\" For 10 points, name this last day of Advent, the day before the birth of Jesus Christ.", "Christmas Eve", "H"]
["This man wrote three Aramaic hymns which each correspond to one of the three Sabbath meals. His actual teachings are only reflected in the writings of his chief disciple Hayyim Vital. This man developed his philosophy in the Galilean town of Safed, where he moved to learn from Moses Cordovero. He taught that the purpose of human existence was \"tiqqun,\" a process of \"mending\" the divine realm to its prior state. The mending process is necessary because the infinite \"Ein Sof\" contracted itself to create space, before concentrating a divine light into a series of vessels which shattered under the strain. This 16th century mystic drew on intensive reading of the (*) Zohar. For 10 points, name this Jewish mystic whose account of the creation inspired his dominant namesake variant of Kabbalah.", "Isaac Luria", "H"]
["In Catholic tradition, this man's feast is celebrated on the day of his birth in an exception to the general rule of feast days commemorating deaths. In Islam, he is said to have cried so much out of love for Allah that the tears marked his cheeks. The Mormons believe that this man descended in a cloud of light in 1829 to anoint Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith into the Aaronic priesthood. This man is the chief object of reverence in the Mandaean religion. The Gospel of Luke describes how this man's name is (*) written out by his father after his birth. The synoptic gospels describe this man dressing in camel hair and eating locusts and wild honey. This man's father Zacharias is rendered mute after disbelieving the Angel Gabriel's assertion that Elizabeth would give birth to him. For 10 points, name this itinerant preacher who baptized Jesus in the Jordan River.", "John the Baptist", "H"]
["This text was partially inspired by a practice instituted by Princess Jincheng. One realm described in this text is a state of pure light and bliss called chikha, while a second realm it describes is called chos-nyid and features apparitions of beautiful and frightening creatures. Although it was likely written in the fourteenth century, it is traditionally ascribed to Padmasambhava, who is also known as (*) Guru Rinpoche. Carl Jung wrote an introduction for Walter Evans-Wentz's English translation of it, which avoided the literal title translation \"liberation by hearing in the intermediate state.\" This text describes the confusion a consciousness suffers as it takes a forty-nine day journey from death to rebirth. For 10 points, name this Vajrayana Buddhist text which takes its common name from an Egyptian funerary manual.", "Bardo Thodol", "H"]
["One ritual in this religion involves constructing a tiny wedding pavilion from sugarcane stalks for the symbolic marriage of a basil plant dressed in traditional bridal attire. A controversial ritual in this religion involves poor people rolling around in the leftovers of food eaten by the rich. At one festival, adherents of this religion balance milk on their heads and pierce their bodies with (*) spikes and hooks. Some adherents of this religion become known as \"twice born\" after receiving a sacred thread in an initiation ceremony. Weddings in this religion include the bride and groom walking around a small fire four times. In this religion, the ancient rite of sacrificing clarified butter in a sacred fire is one form of \"yajna.\" For 10 points, name this religion whose adherents may choose which puja to engage in depending on whether they want to worship Vishnu or Shiva.", "Hinduism", "H"]
["The Sami religion traditionally involved feeding this substance to stone idols. Adherents gather three times per year in the Naples Cathedral to observe a ritual involving this substance. Each Ascension Day, the people of Bruges carry some of this substance from a basilica named for it on a procession around the city. The 96th Surah, al-Alaq, takes its name from a passage that claims humans were created from this substance. In Genesis, God exclaims that this substance (*) \"crieth unto me from the ground.\" In Exodus, the Jews avoid the plague on the firstborn sons by marking their doorposts with this substance. The major debate at the Marburg Colloquy was over whether Christians were metaphorically or actually drinking this substance. For 10 points, name this substance that is either represented by or transformed from wine during the Eucharist.", "Blood", "H"]
["In the first chapter of this book, God commands \"be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.\" It describes a near war that is averted when one side explains that a great altar was merely built as a model to show their children. In this book, a petty thief is stoned to death with his whole family after being blamed for the death of thirty-six men. An angel carrying a sword commands its title character to remove his shoes. Other events related in this book include a hailstorm that destroys Azekah, a prostitute named (*) Rahab aiding a pair of spies, and God heeding the title man when asks that the sun be halted for a day. For 10 points, name this book whose title character sacks the cities of Canaan after succeeding Moses as leader of the Israelites.", "Book of Joshua", "M"]
["In Zoroastrianism, the name for this concept means \"excellent\" or \"making wonderful,\" and it is facilitated by the actions of the saoshyant. In Christianity, the preterist view of this concept holds that the events Jesus described in his Olivet discourse had already occurred. The Frashokereti is the Zoroastrian version of this concept, which is the subject of the field of eschatology. The Aztecs believed that offering human sacrifices to the sun could delay this event for fifty-two years. This event includes the opening of seven seals and the appearance of four horsemen, as described in the Book of Revelation. For 10 points, name this kind of religious event that marks the end of history.", "End of the world", "M"]
["Practitioners of this faith believe that, after death, the soul is trapped in a particular natural location for a year and a day. In some areas, joining this faith involves a sacred head-washing ritual called lave tet, but the primary initiation rite is a secret ceremony called the kanzo. Ceremonial calabash rattles called asson are used by this belief's priests, who are themselves referred to as houngans or mambos. The creator god of this faith is called Bondye, and he is contacted through intermediary spirits called loas, examples of which include Papa Legba and Baron Samedi. For 10 points, name this Yoruban-influenced syncretic religion from Haiti.", "Voodoo", "M"]
["In this Biblical book, a woman who is staying at an inn calls her spouse a \"bloody husband\" after she performs a circumcision. A man in this book laments his \"uncircumcised lips\" while his genealogy is being related to him. In this book, a bitter well is turned sweet when a tree is thrown into it. In this book, the magicians Jannes and Jambres turn rods into snakes that are devoured by another snake. While living in Midian, a man in this book is told the phrase \"I am that I am\" by a burning bush. In this book, a golden calf is idolized by the followers of Aaron while stone tablets bearing the Ten Commandments are given to Moses. For 10 points, name this second book of the Hebrew Bible.", "Book of Exodus", "M"]
["The concepts of mutawatir lafzi and mutawatir manawi relate to the number and quality of narrators present in these texts. These texts are divided into sahih, hasan, or daif, based on how reliable their isnad is. Two sects differ over whether they accept a set of six books or four books of these scriptures. A famous one of these texts invokes the verse of purification on the \"people of the cloak,\" and others record a farewell sermon delivered on Mount Arafat. Al-Bukhari created a collection of these texts, whose sources include Aisha, a wife of its subject. For 10 points, name this set of Islamic scriptures, closely related to the Sunnah, based on the life of Muhammad.", "Hadith", "M"]
["Ugolino Brunforte collected stories about this man and his followers, one of whom cut off a pig's foot to give to a sick man. This man wrote a text praising \"brother fire\" and \"sister bodily death.\" The \"little flowers\" or Fioretti are about this man who wrote the Canticle of the Sun. Brother Juniper was a disciple of this man, who miraculously saved the city of Gubbio from a menacing wolf. This man founded three monastic orders including the Order of St. Clare and the Order of Friars Minor, which is named after him. This man is said to have received the stigmata, and he is said to have preached a sermon to a flock of birds. For 10 points each, name this animal-loving saint from Assisi.", "Francis of Assisi", "M"]
["Adherents of this religion eat foods like fish wrapped in banana leaves and meat with potato chips on its \"day of penitence,\" called Pateti. People entering this religion's afterlife must cross a bridge which can broaden or narrow itself depending on whether that person deserves to go to heaven. Young men in this religion undergo a ceremony in which they are given two sacred items of clothing, the sudreh and the kushti. The Navjote ceremony is practiced in this religion. This religion's followers place their dead in open-topped \"towers of silence\" and worship at fire temples. For 10 points, name this dualistic Persian religion that promotes the worship of Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["Members of this faith greet each other with a phrase meaning \"May my evil deeds be futile\" during the last day of a festival that happens in the rainy season. A sect of this religion believes that a man was miraculously transferred into the womb of Queen Trishala. Right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct are this religion's three \"ratna\" or gems. The Paryushana festival is celebrated in this religion, which was founded by Mahavira, the last of the twenty-four tirthankaras. It is divided into \"sky-clad\" and \"white-clad\" sects. One of this religion's beliefs causes some of its followers to sweep paths to avoid stepping on insects. For 10 points, name this Indian religion whose adherents believe in ahimsa, or nonviolence.", "Jainism", "M"]
["In one event, this figure cut open a man's chest and cleaned it out in order to purify his heart and fill it with wisdom. That same man is also the only human being to ever see this figure in full form. In a separate incident, this being was sent to console a man who was about to be thrown into a great fire. This figure is said to have six hundred wings, and he is believed to drop rubies from them when he travels. This figure brought a man to visit several tiers of heaven where people like Adam and Jesus reside. This figure and a white donkey named al-Buraq accompanied a man on the Night Journey to Jerusalem. For 10 points, name this archangel who revealed the Qur'an to Muhammad.", "Gabriel", "M"]
["One of this religion's texts describes a journey that ends by reaching a place of \"true poverty and absolute nothingness.\" Members of this religion exchange gifts during a four-day period of intercalary days, called the \"days of Ha,\" that allow them to maintain a solar calendar. This religion's founder made a declaration at the Garden of Ridvan, thus fulfilling a prophecy made by a man from Shiraz whose name means \"gate.\" This religion is governed by a council of nine people called the Universal House of Justice. The Book of Certitude is a text of this religion that was led by Shoghi Effendi. For 10 points, name this monotheistic religion that was founded by Bah\u00e1'u'llah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["Although this man's name is not mentioned in the Quran, Allah sends him a raven that digs a pit to bury the body of another raven. His descendent Lamech recounts to Adah and Zillah how he has a particular blessing eleven times as valuable as this man's. This man founds a city that he names for his son Enoch. As a result of this man's actions, his brother Seth is conceived. This man is driven out to the \"Land of Nod,\" which lies east of Eden. This man is given a mark showing that his killer would be punished sevenfold. He answers \"Am I my brother's keeper?\" when God asks him where his brother is. For 10 points, name this eldest son of Adam and Eve who murdered his brother Abel.", "Cain and Abel", "M"]
["At one point during this period, some people go into I'tekaf, or seclusion. The undertaking of umrah bears special weight if taken during this observance. During this period, people recite tariwah at night, and wake up early for suhoor. The Laylat al-Qadr is a full night of worship during this time period. Near the end of this time period observers participate in sadaqah, so that all may celebrate on the first day of Shawwal during the festival of Eid al-Fitr. The concept of sawm refers to self-control and fasting during this time. For 10 points, name this ninth month of the Islamic calendar, during which Muslims typically fast from dawn until dusk.", "Ramadan", "M"]
["Before this man was born, his mother dreamt that a white elephant with six tusks entered her body. This man, whose birth is celebrated on Vesak, was locked away in a palace by King Suddhodana for twentynine years because of a prophecy given by a seer named Asita. This man's charioteer Channa showed him the \"four sights\" of an old man, a sick man, a dead man, and an ascetic. This man resisted the temptations of the demon Mara, and he achieved enlightenment while meditating under the Bodhi tree. At a sermon in Deer Park, this man revealed the Four Noble Truths. For 10 points, name this man who showed the path to nirvana in the religion he founded.", "Gautama Buddha", "M"]
["In a text named for one of these individuals, Bernhard Duhm identified a set of four poems that describe a person with \"his form marred beyond human likeness\" who will \"bear the sins of the multitude.\" The \"Suffering Servant\" songs appear in a text by one of these figures. Another one of these people wrote a book that is traditionally read on the Ninth of Av. The \"Former,\" \"Major,\" and \"Minor\" books of these people appear before the Ketuvim and after the Torah. The Book of Lamentations was written by one of these men who predicted that Babylon would destroy Jerusalem. For 10 points, name these figures from the Hebrew Bible, who included Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah.", "Prophets of Christianity", "H"]
["At the gate of Samaria in front of Jehoshaphat, Zedekiah made some of these objects from iron and proclaimed that he would attack the Arameans. In Ezekiel, the Lord says that on the day when Nebuchadnezzar conquered Egypt, this object of Israel will spring forth, whereas Psalm 132 says that the one of David would blossom. Psalm 75 mentions that these objects of the wicked will be cut o\u20ac, but those of the righteous will be li\u02c6ed high. On the fourth beast from the sea, one of these objects containing human eyes and a boastful mouth emerges and roots out 3 of the 10 previous ones. In Judaism, this kind of object is used by a person called the Baal Tokea, following three sets of prayers during Mussaf. Fear that Solomon would kill him compels Adonijah to take hold of these objects on the four corners of an altar. Samuel anointed David with oil from one of these objects, which is used to announce the jubilee and to bring down Jericho. For 10 points, name this kind of object, such as the shofar, which is made from a ram.", "Horn", "H"]
["This man used the motto \"bona conscientia paradisus,\" or \"a good conscience is paradise,\" and early on he was opposed by his colleague Petrus Plancius, who responded to this man's analysis of Romans 9 by accusing him of endorsing Pelagianism. Hedelivered a set of speeches to the High Council, published in his treatise \"Declaration of Sentiments,\" in which he suggested several revisions to the Heidelberg Catechism and denounced the doctrine of supra-lapsarianism, as part of his feud with his fellow divinity professor Franciscus Gomarus. He died shortly aft\u02c6er those speeches, but 43 of his supporters including Simon Episcopius signed a document known as the Five Articles of the Remonstrance. Despite their e\u20acffort, this man's teaching was condemned by a set of 93 canonical rules adopted at the Synod of Dort. For 10 points, name this Dutch theologian who took his family name from the victor at the Battle of Teutoburg Forest.", "Jacobus Arminius", "H"]
["Many accounts trace the beginning of this religious sect to a scholar named Huiyan, who called together a group of monks and laymen, and was posthumously called the \"First Patriarch\" of this belief for his attempt to establish independent monasteries during the Eastern Jin dynasty. The so-called Seventh Patriarch of this school wrote the \"One Sheet Document\" to summarize its teachings to his followers like Genchi, and he entered the \"Seven-Article Pledge\" to try to appease the government of Go-Toba, but he was exiled anyway. That man was Honen, who founded a version of this belief called Jodo Shu. Followers of this school study the In\u0081finite Life Sutra and attempt to achieve rebirth in Sukhavati by engaging in nianfo, the repetition of the name of Amitabha. For 10 points, name this sect of Buddhism which focuses on achieving enlightenment by entering the namesake geographical location.", "Pure Land Buddhism", "H"]
["Pope John Paul II claimed that this fi\u0081gure o\u20acffers \"an invitation to meditate on the paradoxical refusal of his merciful love.\" The story of this \u0081figure was skipped during early Greek celebrations of Pentecost. Because Eusebius asserted that the story of this \u0081figure was presented by Papias as part of the Gospel of the Hebrews, Joseph Lightfoot argued that it was interpolated. Bruce Metzger claimed that Euthymius Zigabenus was the fi\u0081rst theologian to discuss this \u0081gure, whose story immediately precedes the declaration, \"I am the light of the world.\" Saint Ambrose proposed that another \u0081figure writes \"terra terram accusat\" on the ground with his \u0081finger a\u02c6fter encountering this subject of John 7:53-8:11. This \u0081figure is famously told \"Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more.\" For 10 points, name this person whom Jesus defends by saying, \"He that is without sin among you, let him \u0081rst cast a stone at her.\"", "The Adulteress", "H"]
["Ancient Ugaritic texts refer to this practice as \"esretu,\" which was apparently performed collectively by the entire village instead of by an individual. In Sikh tradition, this practice is called Dasvandh, and manuals specify that it may include the practice of \"sewa.\" In traditional Judaism, the so-called \"\u0081first\" example of it is the \"ma'aser rishon\" and is performed a\u02c6er the terumah, though this practice is general is known as \"ma'aser kesa\u0081m.\" In 1831, a speech by Patrick Lalor started a war in Ireland named for this religious practice; as in England, the Irish church agreed to a \"Commutation Act\" modifying this practice and setting up a Commission for it. Another historical example of this practice was named for Saladin in 1188 AD, and was designed to fund the Third Crusade. For 10 points, name this religious practice in which one-tenth of one's income is given to the church.", "Tithe", "H"]
["One branch of this religious sect was founded by Florence Louise Crawford, while another was founded by Gaston Cashwell, who was called the Apostle of this movement in the South. The man usually credited as its founder developed this movement at the Bethel Bible College in Topeka, Kansas. This sect gained popularity when William Seymour, the son of a slave and the student of its founder Charles Fox Parham, led a gathering of people on Azusa Street in Los Angeles in the middle of a black ghetto. That gathering spawned several churches of this denomination, known as Apostolic Faith Missions. The teaching of this sect emphasizes the \"foursquare gospel,\" which was preached by its convert Aimee McPherson. For 10 points, identify this Christian denomination which sees a lot of practitioners speaking in tongues, and is named in honor of a Christian holiday that falls \u0081\u02c6y days a\u02c6er Easter.", "Pentecostalism", "H"]
["In one story, this \u0081figure bids his men to put a glass plate over the nest of the Moor-Hen, to obtain a cutting tool given to the Moor-Hen by the Angel of the Sea. In another tale, he drips honey into a bowl late at night to prove that the two men at his Court are really women. In the Quran, Asaf off\u20acers to bring him a throne before he can look up to heaven and look down again - that throne is meant for Bilqis, whose land was foretold to this man by the lapwing. The water \u201aowing at this man's glass palace causes Bilqis to lift\u02c6 up her dress, showing him her hairy legs. This fi\u0081gure evokes 72 demons and puts them in brass pots in the Ars Goetia, part of a 17th century grimoire named for the \"Lesser Key\" of this man. His son Rehoboam was entrusted to hide his greater Key in his tomb. For 10 points, name this husband of the Pharaoh's daughter, who built the First Temple of Jerusalem and proposed splitting a baby in two to solve a dispute.", "Solomon", "H"]
["This religious faith is promoted by the historical writings of Le Roy Froom and the magazine El Centinela, which was was \u0081first published by Brenton Connerly. One of its offi\u0192cial leaders, John Byington, converted his property at Buck's Bridge to be a church for this faith. Another leading fi\u0081gure of this faith lived at a home called Elmshaven in California and one called Sunnyside in Australia, where she bought land to set up the Avondale School to promote this belief. That woman was Ellen Gould Harmon, who put out the semi-monthly newspaper The Present Truth along with her husband James White. This belief preaches the idea of \"investigative judgment\" which has been happening since the fateful date of October 22, 1844, the date of the Great Disappointment. For 10 points, name this religious movement founded by Baptist preacher William Miller and centered on observing the Sabbath.", "Seventh-day Adventist Church", "H"]
["This religious sect holds that the world originated when a deity created a white pearl, placed it in the mouth of a white dove named Enfer, and then waited forty thousand years. This sect teaches that its believers can never dwell in any place where lettuce is grown. One of their holy \u0081figures wept for 7,000 years and \u0081filled seven jars with his tears, which put out the \u0081fires of hell. Their writings include collections of hymns known as kawls and a central book which tells of the Seven Mysteries, the most important of whom is the Peacock Angel, a blue peacock who watches over the world at God's command. Followers of this sect perform a pilgrimage to the tomb of Sheikh Adi, and are o\u02c6en seen as devil worshippers. Their name seems to derive from the second caliph of the Umayyad Dynasty who succeeded Muawiyah. For 10 points, name this religious sect recognized by the Kurdish community, especially around Mosul in Iraq.", "Yazidis", "H"]
["A religious movement based in this nation worships the mountain god Saman, who has a moss-covered rock sculpture carved in his honor at Weligama. Another holy site in this nation is the Dambulla cave temple, home to a set of monastic shrines and a megalithic cemetery at Ibban-katuwa. Christian traditions say that St. Thomas ascended to heaven in this nation aft\u02c6er baptizing a king, while a Muslim legend says that Adam stood on one leg for a thousand years in this nation as penance. This country is home to a certain item that Arahat Khema allegedly stole from a funeral pyre, and then had smuggled to this place in the hair ornament of the princess Hemamala. Pilgrims to this country might visit the aforementioned sites like Adam's Peak or the Temple of the Sacred Tooth Relic of the Buddha. They also may visit this country's mystical island of Taprobane. For 10 points, name this island nation home to several religious sites in the city of Kandy.", "Sri Lanka", "H"]
["An inscription outside of a religious structure in this city strangely claims that al-Ma'mun commissioned it, one hundred years before al-Ma'mun was alive. A Mandaean text, the Ginza Rabba, claims that this city was founded from the incestuous union of seven planets with their mother Ruha. A pilgrimage originating in this city is the focus of the Nabi Musa festival. To protect a church in this city, Umar knelt in a courtyard and prayed with its patriarch Sophronius, who opposed the Monothelites. A cave in this city was created when the ground tried to follow a man who le\u02c6ft behind a single footprint. This city's Haram al-Sharif is home to the \"farthest mosque,\" a reference to the surra al-Isra' in which the steed Buraq bears Mohammed here before the ascent to heaven in the Night Journey. For 10 points, the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock are found in, what third-holiest city in Islam, also home to the Temple Mount?", "Jerusalem", "H"]
["Brian Tierney has written a study on the historical origins of this doctrine; he argues that it can be traced back to the scholarly writings of Peter Olivi. A book rejecting this idea was published by Hans Kung in 1971, and led him to be stripped of his license to teach Catholic theology. Protestant opponents of this principle o\u02c6en cite the Three Chapters Controversy as evidence. Defended early on by Robert Bellarmine, this doctrine was formally defi\u0081ned in a constitution called Pastor Aeternus, which was denounced by opponents as part of the heresy of Ultramontanism when it was issued by the First Vatican Council. This idea was invoked by Pius XII when he de\u0081fined the Assumption of Mary as an article of faith, and this doctrine allows for the possibility of speaking ex cathedra. For 10 points, name this Catholic doctrine, which holds that the Pope is unable to err in de\u0081fining a dogma.", "Papal infallibility", "H"]
["This man argued that, just as the Hebrews used treasures plundered from Egypt to build the wilderness tabernacle, Christians must use secular philosophical writings to answer theological questions, in his letter to Gregory Thaumaturgus who responded with an \"address of gratitude\" to this person. He provided a paragraph-by-paragraph refutation of a work called the Alethes Logos, or The True Word, and that refutation was copied into the Philocalia named for this man, compiled by Basil the Great and Gregory Nazianzen. That piece is his tract against Celsus. Gregory of Nyssa was inspired by this man's teaching of apokatastasis,which, along with his doctrine on the pre-existence of souls, led him to be declared anathema at the Fift\u02c6h Ecumenical Council of Constantinople. He also compiled six versions of the Old Testament side-by-side in the Hexapla. For 10 points, name this theologian who allegedly castrated himself, and was a Church Father from Alexandria.", "Origen", "H"]
["One religious \u0081figure born in this place was the translator Drogmi Yeshe, who emphasized a teaching called the Lam Dre and created a school called \"pale earth\" or Sakya. A religious system originating in this place has a scripture called the \"Cavern of Treasures\" and many of its members were persecuted by the Dzungars. That religion teaches a doctrine called the \"Five Pure Lights\" which says that fi\u0081ve forms of matter need to be puri\u0081ed to create the \"rainbow body.\" This teaching has inspired worshippers in this place to create \"prayer \u201aflags\" composed of the fi\u0081ve primary colors, strung either horizontally or vertically. In addition to the indigenous religion of Bon in this place, the younger traditions employ texts like The Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path, and are divided into \"Red Hat\" and \"Yellow Hat\" sects, the latter of which includes only the Gelug-pa school. For 10 points, name this place where the Potala Palace used to be a home for Tenzin Gyatso, who sat in the capital of Lhasa as the Dalai Lama.", "Tibet", "H"]
["The Nihon Shoki says that one of these objects was once found in the stomach of a \"mujina,\" a type of badger, a\u02c6er it was killed by a dog; that one was taken by Emperor Suinin and placed in the Isonokami Shrine at Nara. Several of these items make up an eleke, which is possessed by all of the gods worshipped by the Santeria faith. In another Shinto story, several of these objects, called magatama, were hung on a fi\u0081ve-hundred branched sasaki tree that had been dug up from a mountain. A \u0081gure from Hinduism known as the green and black Jambhala holds a mongoose who spits out these items. A group of these can make up a misbaha in Muslim tradition, and a collection of them makes up the japa mala in Hindu tradition; in both cases, they're o\u02c6en made of sandalwood. For 10 points, name these items which can be used to count prayers when placed on a string, such as in the rosary", "Gemstone", "H"]
["One symbol made using this physical material is called the tripundara. The Manikarnika Ghat is a locale devoted to producing this material, which is collected after the Antam Sanskar ritual in Hinduism. A type of this material called vibhuti is used by some Shiva devotees to draw lines across their forehead, and Shaivite Hindus believe Shiva's entire body is covered with this stuff. Families bring containers of this material to Varanasi for the largest Hindu pilgrimage, in which this material is scattered in the Ganges River. In the Old Testament, people such as Mordecai put it on themselves while wearing sackcloth. For 10 points, name this sacred material sometimes produced from sandalwood, which is also the byproduct of cremation.", "Ashes", "H"]
["This practice inspired the design of otenpesha, sacred objects among the Kakure Kirishitan of Japan. Dominic Loricatius's engagement in this practice was used to defend it in a treatise by Peter Damian. During Lent in nineteenth-century New Mexico, this was done by the Coloradan and New Mexican confraternity Los Hermanos Penitentes. Tatbir and zanjeer zani are forms of this practice which commemorate the martyrdom of Husayn on the Shi'a Muslim holiday of Ashura. The white habit-wearing Brotherhood of the Cross did this to evoke John 19:1, a Biblical episode where Christ stood in front of a column. For 10 points, name this extreme form of religious self-punishment which wandering bands undertook during medieval plagues.", "Self-harm", "H"]
["One crowded frontispiece to this text shows a lion sticking out its tongue below a seated figure making a V with his right-hand fingers. It mentions \"seven precious gems\" before quantifying the number of worlds at \"three thousand great thousand.\" This text promises great virtue to those who recite just four lines of it to others, and lists five types of eye possessed by the \"Tathagata.\" It likens all existence to a bubble or a dew drop in its 32nd and last chapter. A Chinese copy of it found in the Dunhuang cave, from 868 CE, is the oldest extant printed book. Set in the Jeta grove, this dialogue shows Subhuti learning the \"perfection of wisdom\" from the Buddha. For 10 points, name this medium-length Mahayana sutra, which likens itself to a hard, sharp cutter of illusion.", "Diamond Sutra", "H"]
["At this man's execution, the first shot loosed his bonds rather than killing him as intended. This author of The Seven Proofs and the Bayan was followed by Quddus among a set of disciples called the \"letters of the living,\" who evangelized the faith he founded. This man, whose birth is celebrated on the fifth day of 'Ilm, promised the coming of \"Him whom God shall make manifest.\" This man's namesake shrine, containing his remains, is found on Mount Carmel. Counting himself, his discipleship had nineteen people, corresponding to nineteen attributes of God and the nineteen months of a later religion's calendar. For 10 points, name this 19th-century Persian prophet whose adopted name means \"gate,\" a predecessor and herald of Baha'ullah venerated by Bahais.", "B\u00e1b", "H"]
["At this event, Augustin Bea got into a heated argument with a man who adopted the personal motto Semper idem, named Alfredo Ottaviani. Hundreds of gossipy letters about this event were published under the pseudonym Xavier Rynne. Supporters of ressourcement lost out to a policy of aggiornamiento at this meeting, whose Four Constitutions include Lumen Gentium and Gaudium et Spes. Marcel Lefebvre was excommunicated for defying this meeting's precepts. The declaration Nostra Aetate was issued on the subject of the Jews at this meeting, which was convened by John XXIII and continued by Paul VI. For 10 points, name this gathering which made Latin mass optional and eased relations with non-Catholics, the liberalizing, 20th-century ecumenical council.", "Second Vatican Council", "H"]
["One text of this faith group bans \"large gathering[s] of people\" or \"display\" when laying the cornerstone of churches. At the beginning of religious services, members of this denomination recite a \"statement of being\" which notes that \"there is no life, truth, intelligence, or substance in matter.\" The founder of this denomination, who studied under Phineas Quimby, also wrote Pulpit and Press and Manual of the Mother Church, which can be found in its Reading Rooms. This denomination started after its founder opened a Bible to Matthew 9:2 during a spinal injury, and then wrote a text whose second part is a Key to the Scriptures.. For 10 points, name this Christian sect founded by Mary Baker Eddy, whose belief in prayer healing leads members to refuse medicine.", "Christian Science", "H"]
["During one time period of this type, a human witnessed a tree with leaves like elephant ears after seeing Moses weep in the sixth heaven. The 'Isha prayer service occurs during this time period. Within a specific holiday, many people start off this time period by eating a date fruit at iftar. Prayer during one of these time periods is valued the same as a thousand months of prayers. A white steed with a human face flew to the \"farthest mosque\" in Jerusalem during one of these times with Muhammad. One of these \"of Power\" was the time at which Gabriel first appeared to reveal the Qur'an. It occurs after Maghreb time in Islamic timekeeping. For 10 points, name this recurring span of time, during which meals are eaten in Ramadan and the last of five prayers is said daily.", "Night", "H"]
["This person was passed over by a man called Ploni Almoni, a Hebrew placeholder name akin to John Doe. This person's namesake narrative notes that the giving of a sandal was once a common token of exchange. A trial of ten elders determined the fate of this person in a book read on Shavuot. After getting separated from Orpah, this one-time wife of Mahlon uncovers the feet of a man on a threshing floor. This mother of Obed helped restore the line of Elimelech and met her eventual husband while gleaning in the fields. This Moabite declares \"Intreat me not to leave you\u0085Where you go, I go\" to her mother-in-law Naomi. For 10 points, name this woman who became an Israelite by marrying Boaz, a great-grandmother of King David whose namesake Biblical book comes after Judges.", "Ruth", "H"]
["In one story, this man peeled stripes of bark off several branches and stuck the resulting striped sticks in a drinking trough. This man chooses not to go back to Mount Seir with the head of the Edomites. He talks with Hamor before his family circumcises and kills the men of the city of Shechem. An injury incurred by this man at Luz explains a prohibition on eating the sciatic nerve of animals. This man's concubines include Bilhah and Zilpah, and he served the shepherd Laban for fourteen years. While traveling, he named a rock \"house of God,\" or Beth-El, years after trading a pot of lentils and strapping goatskins to his arms to earn his father's blessing. For 10 points, name this husband of Leah and Rachel, an Old Testament patriarch who wrestled an angel.", "Jacob", "H"]
["During this time period, people recite a poem whose name means \"And we will recount the power,\" the Unetanneh Tokef. On this time period's final day, married men sometimes wear a white robe called a kittel. During this time span, one might hear commands such as \"Sh'varim teruah\" and \"tekiah,\" and many services contain the Avinu Malkeinu prayer. Some people during this time period scatter bread crumbs in a river. It includes the Fast of Gedaliah. People seek teshuvah during this time period, which uses a prayer book called the Mahzor. The Book of Life is open in this part of the month of Tishrei. It ends on a day on which leather shoes are banned. For 10 points, name this time period in which the shofar is used, ending on a fast day devoted to atonement ten days after the Jewish new year.", "High Holy Days", "H"]
["This book describes a \"hammering process\" undergone by the Jews. It notes that nobody alive saw the Norman Conquest or the Spanish Armada in a passage on appeals to authority, and that a man who sired a baby each time he had sex could \"easily populate a small village\" in 10 years. Metaphors in this book include the \"human fleet,\" in which each ship must steer itself to avoid collisions. This book compares unkind Miss Bates to the friendly Dick Firkin, and describes the Next Step towards New Men, in its last segment, \"Beyond Personality.\" This work warns against \"soft soap,\" calls the world \"enemy-occupied territory,\" and posits the options of lunatic, fiend, or God in a \"trilemma\" about Jesus. For 10 points, name this work of apologetics compiled from wartime BBC broadcasts, in which C. S. Lewis sets out the basics of his faith.", "Christ", "H"]
["This text compares a mountain home to a \"joyous assembly\" of angels to a mountain burning with fire which even animals are not allowed to touch. Ruth Hoppin used a reference to \"those from Italy\" in this text to argue that it was written by a woman named Priscilla. This text's fourth chapter promises entry into God's \"rest.\" This text defines faith as \"the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen,\" and speaks of Christ as \"of the order of Melchizedek,\" a man from Genesis who is mentioned eight times in this work. This text speaks of Christ as greater than the angels, Moses, and Joshua, and argues for treating Jesus as high priest. For 10 points, name this anonymous letter in the New Testament, which uses many Old Testament examples and is addressed to God's chosen people.", "Epistle to the Hebrews", "H"]
["An official at one of these places rotates a drill made of loquat wood against a flat block of cypress each night; that example of these places has its own salt refinery. Another of these places hangs a purple screen out front on holidays rather than the usual white curtain with four sixteen-petaled flowers printed on it. Horizontal ropes of twisted straw hold zigzagging streamers at these places, where visitors spit water out of their mouths near a basin where they use a ladle to wash their hands. A sacred mirror is allegedly stored in the holiest of these places, which is rebuilt every twenty years. These places have inner halls called haiden and honden. For 10 points, name these sacred complexes demarcated by double-crossbarred gates called torii, which revere spirits called kami.", "Shinto shrine", "H"]
["This animal is sometimes referred to by the euphemism \"davar akher,\" meaning \"another thing.\" These animals are the most important status symbol among the Papuan people of New Guinea, who give them as dowries. A black one in the center of the dharmachakra wheel symbolizes ignorance among the \"three poisons\" of Buddhism, between a snake and a bird. In the Gospel of Luke, a craving for the carob husks eaten by these animals inspires the Prodigal Son to stop caring for them and return home. Among the Gerasenes, the exorcism of the demon Legion led many of these animals to drive themselves into the Sea of Galilee. For 10 points, name these livestock animals which are neither halal nor kosher, and proverbially fail to appreciate the pearls thrown before them.", "Pig", "H"]
["A series of lectures about this belief system contrasts the \"In-Triple-World Law\" with the \"Beyond Triple-World Law.\" This system believes that a white substance translated as \"virtue\" accumulates in us with good deeds, and a black substance accumulates with bad karma. This practice's three central tenets are Truthfulness, Compassion, and Forebearance, which it believes to underpin the cosmos. Its followers try to open a \"Celestial Eye\" through \"cultivation.\" The Kilgour-Matas report accused persecutors of this group of harvesting their organs. Lectures mentioning the arrival of UFOs to earth were given by its founder, Li Hongzhi. For 10 points, name this new spiritual movement and set of exercises which is being persecuted by the Communist Chinese government.", "Falun Gong", "E"]
["Children are initiated into this religion by receiving the sudreh undershirt and kusti thread. Followers of this religion believe the urvan is united with the fravashi prior to birth, then reunited four days after death. Two foureyed dogs guard this religion's Chinvat Bridge, where souls are judged after death. Due to its belief in the sacredness of the elements, this religion exposes corpses on the Towers of Silence. Followers must choose between druj and asha, and scripture in this religion includes the Vendidad and Gathas, both contained within the Avesta. For 10 points, name this dualistic Persian faith centered around the cosmic struggle between Angra Mainyu and Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "E"]
["Before this event, the central figure told his friends to follow a man carrying a water jar, and after this event, the central figure went to the Valley of Kidron. During this event, which occurred at the Cenacle, the central figure compared himself to a vine. That figure gave his friends the commandment to \"Love one another, as [he] has loved [them].\" Before this event, one man asked to have his head and hands washed, as well as his feet. During this event, the central figure blessed and shared bread and wine, which he claimed were his Body and Blood. For 10 points, name this Biblical event commemorated on Holy Thursday, in which Jesus predicted his betrayal the night before his death.", "Last Supper", "E"]
["In the Mahakala tantra, this substance is described as the \"perfect medicine.\" After the Churning of the Ocean of Milk, this substance was created where drops of the nectar Amrita touched the ground. Yogis of the Shaivite cult often consume this substance as an aid to their sadhana, or spiritual practice. The Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church teaches that this substance is the Eucharist, and another religion makes use of it through long vessels called chalices in their \"reasoning sessions.\" In Hinduism, it is called bhang or ganja, and is often presented to Shiva as an offering. For 10 points, name this cannabinoid often smoked by Rastafarians, who can now legally do so in Colorado and Washington.", "Cannabis (drug)", "E"]
["These figures were only able to realize that a certain man was dead after his staff was gnawed from under his arm, causing the corpse of that man, Solomon, to fall to the ground. The seventy-second sura of the Qur'an is named for these beings, and reciting the Throne Verse supposedly wards off these entities. Shaytan was said to have taken the form of one when he refused to bow to Adam. One class of these figures is ifrit, while \"constant companion\" group of them are known as qarin. For 10 points, name these creatures from Arabic tradition which are said to be composed of smokeless fire, one of which was summoned by Aladdin by rubbing a lamp.", "Jinn", "E"]
["The first martyr of this religion was forced to sit on a burning iron sheet for five days before being thrown into a river. The Bara Maha is read during one of this religion's holiday Sangrand, and adherents of this religion are baptized after drinking holy water during Amrit Sanchar. Adherents of this religion sing Shabad Kirtan at places of worship that bear the Ik Onkar known as gurdwaras, and a wooden comb and a dagger are among this religion's Five K's. The \"Mul Mantra\" and Japji Sahib appear in this religion's central text, the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Guru Nanak, many of whose adherents live in the Punjab region of India.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["The preface of this work describes \"thick and palpable clouds [overshadowing the] Land,\" dispelled by this work's namesake figure. The frontispiece of the first edition of this work features two brothers standing on either side, one wearing the ephod and hoshen, above a pelican feeding her young in a cartouche. The printer, Robert Barker, printed multiple erroneous editions of this work, one of which accidentally orders readers to commit adultery. The idea of this work was conceived as a middle ground between High Church bishops and Puritans at the Hampton Court Conference. For 10 points, name this English version of the Bible translated during the rule of its namesake king.", "King James Version", "E"]
["In Jainism, \u0101srava is the influx of this substance, which is released through nirjara, and arihants have eliminated the four ghati forms of this substance. Sikhism explains this concept with the influence of the three qualities of Maya, and Gurbani's law of this concept likens it to a seed through which one can obtain fruits. In Theravada Buddhism, the five anantarika forms of this concept will definitely affect either a person's present life or the next. For 10 points, name this concept in many Indian religions that affects when one can attain moksha and escape the cycle of sams\u0101ra, the belief that actions will influence one's future lives.", "Karma", "E"]
["One of these works was supposedly written to Seneca the Younger, but was never authenticated, and another of these works was co-written by Sosthenes. One of these warns against Encratism and teaches congregations how to pray, while another addressed to the same person uses the phrase \"Itching Ears\" to refer to people who simply hear what they wish. Most of these works begin with \"Dear brothers and sisters.\" One of these says that women should cover their heads in the presence of God and that \"Love is patient; love is kind.\" For 10 points, name these Biblical books found after the Acts of the Apostles, written by a certain Apostle to the Gentiles.", "Pauline epistles", "E"]
["In Hinduism, the central items of this action are called bhiksha. Vaishyas and kshatriyas may not be recipients of this action, while brahmans can be under certain circumstances. The Mishneh Torah lists eight levels of this action, the last being this action performed simply out of pity. Zen monks practice takuhatsu to encourage others to perform this action. This action is required at Purim for Jews in the mishloach manot and at the end of Ramadan for Muslims to help others celebrate Eid al-Fitr. In many Christian churches a basket with a long handle is used to collect this. For 10 points, name this action mandated in zakat, the third pillar of Islam, the act of donating to the poor.", "Alms", "E"]
["The Ten Year Crusade was completed by this belief system's Hands of the Cause, members of which include the Custodians. This belief system, which is believed to have originated out of an Islamic offshoot called the Shaykhi tradition, is governed by seven National Spiritual Assemblies, which promulgate texts such as The Seven Valleys and The Book of Certitude. Adherents to this religion endure a nineteen-day fasting period, and Shoghi Effendi was the Guardian of this religion until 1957. Prophets of this religion include Adam, Krishna, and Jesus. For 10 points, name this religion which is centered at the House of Justice in Haifa and follows the teachings of Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "E"]
["People possessed by spirits in this religion are called tongji, and some sects of religion believe that Li Hong will appear at the apocalypse. Celestial Masters emerged as leaders of one branch of this religion in the Wudoumi (\"oodoh-mee\") Movement. One practitioner of this religion accompanied Genghis Khan and convinced him against trying to attain immortality. In modern times, this religion primarily consists of the Zhengyi and Quanzhen Schools. This religion's founder emphasized wuwei and supposedly left his home country on an ox after writing its central work. For 10 points, name this Chinese religious tradition founded by Lao Tzu.", "Taoism", "E"]
["In the Hadith, Muhammad recommends a gulp of this substance for healing purposes. Jonathan consumes some of this substance in the Bible, thus violating an oath that his father Saul had sworn. In Hinduism, this substance is called madhu and is considered one of the five elixirs of immortality. During Rosh Hashanah, apples dipped in this substance are considered good luck for the new year. During his stay in the desert, John the Baptist ate only locusts and this food. The Book of Exodus describes the Promised Land as flowing with milk and this substance. For 10 points, name this sugary substance, which Samson found in a beehive in the carcass of a lion.", "Honey", "E"]
["A dispute in perichoresis, which describes relationships in this concept, was instigated by the addition of the Filioque clause in the Western Creed. St. Bernard of Clairvaux described this concept using the analogy of a kiss, and the Borromean rings are a visual representation of this concept. While meditating on this concept, St. Augustine came across a boy trying to put the ocean in a hole by using a seashell, who explained that attempting to fully understand this concept was futile. A Bible passage supporting this concept is the Baptismal Formula given by Christ. For 10 points, name this Christian concept that describes God as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.", "Trinity", "E"]
["Affinity, reality, and communication form a namesake concept map in this religion. Criminon is a program seeking to rehabilitate prisoners using the teachings of this religion's founder. Training and processing are the two sides of this religion's \"Bridge to Total Freedom.\" A form of counseling which generally makes use of the E-meter in this religion is known as auditing, and souls in this religion are referred to as thetans. One deity in this religion brought humans to earth in spaceships, placed them around volcanoes, and killed them by detonating hydrogen bombs. For 10 points, name this religion that worships Xenu and arose from the Dianetics of its founder, L. Ron Hubbard.", "Church of Scientology", "M"]
["One character in this book watches a goat kill a ram before it grows four horns. A king in this book is likened to a tree and later spends seven years \"eating grass like an ox\". Another ruler is slain the same night that he sees the words \"mene, mene, tekel, upharsin.\" Three officials in this book, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fail to worship a golden statue but emerge unscathed after being thrown in a furnace. This book features Belshazzar's feast, where the \"writing on the wall\" appears and the title prophet interprets it. For 10 points, name this Old Testament book whose title prophet interprets the dreams of Babylonian and Persian kings and survives a lion's den.", "Book of Daniel", "M"]
["A type of this practice in Hinduism involves a meal known as bhiksha prepared for a religious leader. Maimonides stated that the highest form of this action results in self-reliance for those affected by it. In Buddhism, this action is known as Dana and can involve either spiritual or physical objects. The Hebrew word for this practice in Judaism literally means \"righteousness.\" In Islam, the nisab is a minimum mandated amount for this practice, which is mandated by the third pillar, Zakat. For 10 points, name this religious practice which Jews call tzedakah, and is often solicited in churches by collection plates.", "Alms", "M"]
["This figure is revered at Lumbini by pilgrims, and repulsed a figure known as Mara while residing in the Deer Park. The Kingdom of Kandy claimed to preserve a tooth of this figure, who once held up a flower wordlessly in lieu of a speech and developed a following called the sangha. This member of the Shakya clan first saw an old man, a sick man, and a corpse during his journeys as a prince. The Pali canon, or Tipitaka, was written by followers of this man, who discovered that all life is suffering as he sat under the Bodhi tree. For 10 points, name this being who promoted the Four Noble Truths and the Eightfold Path after achieving nirvana.", "Gautama Buddha", "M"]
["One prayer on this holiday contains the words \"Ki vanu vacharta v'otanu kidashta mikol ha-amim.\" A stew called hamin is often prepared before this holiday, the subject of the imperative Hebrew words \"shamor\" and \"zachor\" in a song likening it to a bride. This holiday's namesake \"goys\" help people uphold 39 injunctions called melakhot, and it concludes when a braided candle is dipped in wine at the Havdalah ceremony. A braided, eggy bread called challah is traditionally eaten after saying Kiddush and lighting candles on this holiday's evening dinner. For 10 points, name this holiday begun on Friday evenings, a weekday on which Jews rest.", "Shabbat", "M"]
["This man rushed into the quarters of the Syrian sultan al-Malik, who rejected his offers to spare both their heads. He claimed \"Bodily Death\" as a sister in a writing that mentions \"Sister Water\" and \"Brother Fire.\" According to Thomas of Celano, this man helped save the town of Gubbio from a wolf. At San Damiano, this man was told to repair a ruined house by a vision of Christ on the cross. In the early 1200s, this author of the Canticle of the Sun was followed by the female Poor Clares and a namesake order of impoverished friars after receiving the stigmata. For 10 points, name this patron saint of animals, an Italian from Assisi whose name was adopted by the new pope in 2013.", "Francis of Assisi", "M"]
["One group of these people covers the floors of their houses of worship with sand, and uses a legal code whose name literally means \"set table\". In the Arab world, many of these people are called Mizrahis. These believers separate out their laws from customs called minhag. In the 1650s, this group established itself in Recife, Brazil. After a period of study, converts to this faith immerse in a ritual bath. One branch of this faith uses the Ladino language, a creole based on Spanish. For 10 points, name this religion whose Sephardic subgroup was kicked out of Spain, whose religious clothing includes the tallit prayer shawl.", "Sephardi Jews", "M"]
["One of these poems repeats the refrain \"his love endures forever.\" One of these poems includes musical images like \"the sound of the trumpet\" and cymbals that are \"loud\" and \"clashing.\" Two long examples of these poems are acrostics going down their alphabet. Fifteen of these poems begin with the declaration \"A song of ascent.\" The speaker of one of these texts \"walk[s] through the valley of the shadow of death\" and says that his \"cup runneth over.\" That twenty-third one of these poems begins \"The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall not want.\" For 10 points, name this set of 150 poems attributed to King David, which make up a Biblical book before Proverbs.", "Psalms", "M"]
["A feast for this religious figure in mid-August is prepared for by a two-week fast. It's not Artemis, but a \"House of\" this figure stands a few miles outside Ephesus. This figure, who caused the \"Miracle of the Sun\" near F\u00e1tima in 1917, is the subject of the fourth and fifth Glorious Mysteries, and a request including the phrase \"now and at the hour of our death\". This subject of the writing Ineffabilis Deus is called \"Theotokos\" by Orthodox churches. This figure underwent the Dormition before the Assumption, and was free of original sin due to the Immaculate Conception. For 10 points, name this woman who is \"full of grace,\" the husband of Joseph and mother of Jesus.", "Mary, mother of Jesus", "M"]
["Falun Gong founder Li Hongzhi has stated that these objects have corrupted humans during the last century. Dorothy Martin, also called Marion Keach, led a cult whose failed prophecy regarding these objects was studied by Leon Festinger. The Nation of Islam posits that the book of Ezekiel describes one of these objects termed the \"Mother Plane.\" Claude Vorilhon learned about the Elohim from a messenger from one of these objects, leading him to found the Ra\u00eblians. Some of these objects which look like DC-8s took thetans to Earth during the reign of Xenu. For 10 points, name these craft, which the Heaven's Gate cult tried to reach one of behind Comet Hale-Bopp.", "Curtis Peebles", "M"]
["In the Book of Kings, this is the location where Elisha heals Naaman; Elisha also performs a miracle with an axe- head in this location. An altar by this place is built as a \"witness\" for the two and a half tribes of Gad, Reuben, and Manasseh. The town of Bethabara, adjacent to this geographical feature, is where John the Baptist resided. The Holy Spirit descended as a dove over this location, where the voice of the Father recognized Jesus as his Son. In the Book of Joshua, the priests carrying the Ark can safely cross this body of water because it stops flowing momentarily. For 10 points, name this river that the Israelites crossed to enter the Promised Land, where Jesus was baptized.", "Jordan River", "M"]
["This religious group believes that a \"ball of curious workmanship\" helped a group escape from Jerusalem. One book of this sect was verified by the Three Witnesses and the Eight Witnesses. It does not let outsiders view its \"endowment\" or \"sealing\" ceremonies. The Doctrine and Covenants is a sacred text for this faith group, whose stories include a war between Lamanites and Nephites. Two-year missions are required for men in this denomination, which believes an angel revealed golden plates to a prophet in upstate New York. For 10 points, name this Christian denomination founded by Joseph Smith, which ended polygamy after settling in Salt Lake City.", "Mormonism", "M"]
["Sequin-covered flags known as \"drapo\" figure prominently in this religion, whose services also incorporate flour drawings known as \"v\u00e9v\u00e9s\". This faith includes the kanzo initiation ceremony, and its major spirits include Ogoun, who presides over war. Houngans are male priests in this religion, whose female counterparts are called mambos. In lieu of interacting with the creator god, Bondye, adherents of this religion address their services to spirits known as loas, who include Papa Legba and the top-hatted death spirit Baron Samedi. For 10 points, name this syncretic religion primarily found in Haiti.", "Haitian Vodou", "M"]
["The Darul Uloom Deoband is one of these institutions in India, which promulgates Hanafi views of fiqh. People in these places work to acquire an ijazah, which lets them join a group called the ulama. A roughly pyramid-like mudbrick building with many protrusions was part of one named Sankore in medieval Timbuktu. After its reclamation from the Moors, Salamanca was home to a Christian one in medieval Spain. New muftis are created by a type of this institution called the madrassa. For 10 points, name these places where religion lessons are taught to youths in classrooms.", "Islamic schools", "H"]
["A hadith in Sahih Muslim reports that this man resembles Urwah ibn Mas'ud. The sight of a bird feeding her young in a tree inspired a woman to conceive this man's mother, and with Allah's permission, this man breathed life into a bird he designed from clay. This man of reddish-white complex revealed the injil in addition to affirming the tawrat and zabur, and he will descend near Damascus in saffron garments with his hands placed on the wings of two angels. The last revelation to become (*) tahrif was revealed by this man. In Surah an-Nisa, the disbelievers claim to have killed this man, though that is revealed to be an illusion. Along with the Madhi, this figure will pursue the Dajjal in preparation for the Day of Resurrection, which is why he is known as the masih. For 10 points, name this son of Yusuf and Maryam who, according to Islam, was not killed by crucifixion.", "Isa", "H"]
["Twelve religious sites of this sect are located where a certain figure appeared as a pillar of light. The poems and lives of sixty-three devotional poets of this sect are collected in the Tirumulai. Pilgrims of this sect worship an object formed of ice in the Amarnath caves. Lakulish is credited with founding this sect's Pashupata school, a rival of the tantric Siddhanta tradition developed by the Nayanar poets. A major form of worship in this sect is the application of ash across the forehead. Members of this sect recite the Panchakshara mantra as part of the Sri Rudram hymn. An important figure from this sect is depicted holding (*) fire in one of his left hands as he performs a cosmic dance. The primary deity of this religion is often depicted living on Mount Kailash and represented with a sacred phallic object, the lingam. For 10 points, name this sect that primarily venerates the an aspect of the Trimurti known as \"The Destroyer\".", "Shaivism", "H"]
["God summons one of these animals to devour corn after King Solomon prays to feed all the creatures in the world. The hunter Natsilane kills his brother-in-law with one of these animals after growing it from yellow cedar. A poem from the Exeter Book titled for one of these mammals describes an encounter with Fastitocalon, an Aspidochelone that behaves like another creature sometimes described as one of these mammals, the Jasconius encountered by Saint (*) Brendan. Big Raven eats mushrooms in order to gain enough strength to move one of these animals, which are preyed upon by thunderbirds. To escape Ruatapu, Paikea rides one of them in a Maori myth. Along with seals and walruses, they were born from the chopped fingers of Sedna. For 10 points, name these mammals exemplified by the Leviathan and the swallower of Jonah.", "Whale", "H"]
["One passage in this work describes how the sun, in its splendor, is followed by the moon and concealed by the night, before describing the fate of a people who hamstrung an animal. This work describes those who do not take refuge in God as being like spiders who make their homes in webs and details the War of the Confederates in a section that details who the \"people of the cloak\" are. The beginning of this work, translated as \"the Exordium\" or (*) \"the Opening\", asks for guidance along the \"straight path\". A famous passage from this work describes God as seized by neither slumber nor sleep and unburdened by the care of the heavens and earth. That passage is part of a chapter that takes its name from the sacrifice of a cow by the Israelites, and is known as the \"Throne Verse\". For 10 points, name this holy text composed of suras.", "Quran", "H"]
["This man was the main source outside of the Bible itself drawn upon in writing the Old Testament portion of the Postillae Perpetuate. Judah Loew's Gur Aryeh is a commentary on this man's writings. This man was the first to define clearly the distinction between the hermeneutical principles of derash and peshat. Many Jews tie extra tefilin to honor both this man and his son Rabbenu Tam. His halachic rulings are collected in the (*) Sefer Ha-Pardes and Machzor Vitry. A niche that miraculously appeared to save this man's mother from being run over by a carriage is in his namesake synagogue in Worms. The responses of this man's followers to his own works are called Tosafot. His namesake script was the first used to print Hebrew. For 10 points, name this 11th-century rabbi whose commentary is reproduced in all printed editions of the Talmud, and whose common appellation is an acronym of \"Rabbi Shlomo Yitzhaki\".", "Rashi", "H"]
["Nagarjuna's \"Letter to a friend\" claims that those who repeatedly hear of this concept will develop the character of a diamond. This concept is represented by the statues in the Wang Saen Suk garden of one Thai wat. Variations of this concept are described after a man is cross-examined by a king who chastises him for ignoring a divine messenger covered in excrement in the Devaduta Sutra. The Bon festival celebrates Maudgalyayana giving offerings in order to deliver his (*) mother from this concept, which for those who perform anantarika-kamma is exemplified by Av\u012bci. The bodhisattva Ksitigarbha vowed not to become a Buddha until the emptying of all manifestations of this concept, which describes the temporary destination of beings who possess negative karma. For 10 points, name these realms that include the eight cold and hot Narakas, places of suffering in Buddhist cosmology.", "Genshin", "H"]
["One document produced at this event refers to promoting the proper development of culture to be one of \"problems of special urgency\". In this event's aftermath, the journal Concilium was founded to promote its spirit. At this event, the concept of ressourcement was championed by the conservative wing, many of whom were members of the Congregation of the Holy Office. At this meeting's \"Black Thursday\" or \"Day of Wrath\", the pope postponed the vote on a document lobbied for by John (*) Courtney Murray, which was a declaration on religious freedom. Cardinal Bea spearheaded a document that opposes blaming Jews for the death of Christ. Those documents produced by this council are the Dignitatis Humanae and the Nostra Aetate. For 10 points, name this church council led by John XXIII and Paul VI, which authorized masses in the vernacular and liberalized 20th-century Catholic practice.", "Second Vatican Council", "H"]
["This book's description of the extramarital affairs of Agrippa II and its description of Theudas as a rebel in Jerusalem have suggested to some scholars that its author knew the Antiquities of Josephus. A passage in this book quotes Psalms 2 in claiming that the line \"Why do the heathen rage and imagine a vain thing?\" was spoken through David by the Holy Spirit. In this book, the worship of the God that \"does not dwell in temples made by human hands\" is advocated in a speech inspired by an (*) altar dedicated \"To an Unknown God.\" Those passages from this book are The Believers' Prayer and the Areopagus Sermon. Though it is not the Gospel of Luke, this book opens with a dedication to Theophilus. This book describes the election of Matthias to replace Judas and the conversion of St. Paul. For 10 points, name this fifth book of the New Testament, which describes the deeds of the followers of Christ.", "Acts of the Apostles", "H"]
["To save him from being sacrificed to Moloch, Hezekiah's mother smears him with the blood of these creatures. Benvenuto Cellini allegedly saw one of these creatures, after which his father punched him in the ear to make him remember it. Some Jewish sources posit that myrtlewood is required for their creation, while Aristotle believed they were born from chalcites and had wings. These creatures can poison apple trees by climbing them. Their silk, hair or wool can be spun into garments that protect the wearer from certain types of damage. According to Paracelsus, these creatures are the counterparts of sylphs, undines and gnomes. These creatures are most commonly sighted when (*) rotting wood is burned, causing them to scamper through the flames. For 10 points, name these fire elementals, a legendary type of amphibian.", "Salamander", "H"]
["The fourth book of ahadith collected by Sahih al-Bukhari is titled after this action. In the Eastern Orthodox church, this action is typically performed immediately after the rite of chrismation. Jesus says that \"this people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me\" after a group of Pharisees criticize his disciples for not \"walking according to the tradition of the elders\" and performing this action. One type of this action must be performed on ground that is free of najaasah. In one hadith, Uthman relates that Muhammad stated that performing this action will result in the forgiveness of past sins if it is followed by performing two (*) raka'at. Niddah can be ended by performing this action in a mikvah, a ritual that converts to Judaism undergo. Tayammum is a form of this action performed with sand in place of ghusl or wudu, which must be carried out before salat. For 10 points, name this ritual purification that involves washing oneself.", "Ablution", "H"]
["The Nine Saints were a group of missionaries in this country, which is home to the Garima gospels. The official Bible of this country's largest church contains three books about non-Hasmonean Maccabees, as well as the Book of Jubilees and the Book of the Covenant. A religion with priests called kahen is originally from this country, in which itinerant religious figures who perform white magic and exorcisms are known as debteras. This country is home to the church of Our Lady Mary of Zion, which claims to contain the the (*) Ark of the Covenant. Frumentius was the first to evangelize in this country, which is the home of the Beta Israel community. The official name of this country's Orthodox Church contains the word Tewahedo, a word from its liturgical language of Ge'ez. For 10 points, name this country, where the Kingdom of Axum became one of the first officially Christian polities.", "Ethiopia", "H"]
["The Sarajevo one of these texts is Spanish in origin and the Golden example of this book may be the oldest illustrated example. A disputation in this text concerns whether the \"all\" in the phrase \"all the days of your life\" extends its coverage to nighttime or to the days of the Messiah, beyond the present-world. Though it is not from Genesis, a portion of this text requires reciting how Laban the Aramean tried to destroy \"my father\". A passage in this text ends with God smiting the Angel of (*) Death and begins with a goat being bought for two zuzim. This text provides instructions for the korech, or the making of the Hillel Sandwich. This text includes the Ma Nishtana, or Four Questions, the first of which asks: \"Why is this night different from all other nights?\", and typically includes illustrations of the the Exodus from Egypt. For 10 points, name this text that establishes the procedures of the Passover Seder.", "Haggadah", "H"]
["They're not Indians, but on their first birthday, some members of this ethnic group are seated in front of a table and allowed to pick from objects like a book and scissors to foretell their future. Members of this ethnic group venerate the dead by preparing a five-rowed table of food in front of a photograph or tablet. The bilingual Methodist hymnal Come, Let Us Worship is utilized by this ethnic group, whose Presbyterian church is the fastest-growing in the US. A Pentecostal (*) Full Gospel Church serving this ethnic group is the world's largest megachurch. One member of this ethnic group outlined \"indemnity\" in Exposition of the Divine Principle, a guide to a new religious movement that began among these people; that religion's members take the Family Pledge and hold mass weddings. For 10 points, name this ethnic group that makes up the majority of the Unification Church founded by Sun Myung Moon.", "Koreans", "H"]
["Institutions run by these people began to mill grain and press oil from it after being granted exemption from taxes under a man who took power during the Xuanwu Gate Incident. Emperor Saga patronized one of these people who worked at Xi Ming, while another of them, Ennin, chronicled a campaign carried out against these people at the instigation of Han Yu by Emperor Wuzong. A diary kept by Fa Xian, one of these people, is the origin of a legend that demons and dragons inhabit the island of Ceylon. Another of these people fled from Chang'an to the court of a Turkic ruler at Turfan in defiance of an edict by (*) Taizong, an emperor of the Tang dynasty. Xuanzang, one of these people, undertook a trip to India that was fictionalized by Wu Cheng'en in \"Journey to the West.\" For 10 points, name these people you could find in Zen temples.", "Bhikkhu", "H"]
["One figure in this book takes four servants and two camels to Rages of Media to acquire ten talents of silver by showing a bond to Gabael. In this book, the daughter of Edna and Raguel decides to pray for God to kill her instead of strangling herself at the same time that another figure prays for death after demanding the return of bleating kid. The title figure of this book returns home from Nineveh for Pentecost and learns that a fellow man of Naphtali has been strangled before he is blinded by (*) sparrow droppings, though his sight is later restored by the gall of a fish. This book describes the marriage of the title figure's son to the sevenfold-widowed Sarah, as engineered by Brother Azariah, who is really a disguised archangel. For 10 points, name this apocryphal biblical book which centers on Raphael binding the husband-slaying demon of lust Asmodeus, and which is named for the righteous father of Tobias.", "Book of Tobit", "H"]
["One text describes the culmination of this practice as a \"little butterfly\" that \"dies with supreme joy\" and likens it to rainwater falling from heaven into a river. In a parable about this practice, a king orders his servants to cast a group of people into the outer darkness after seeing their attire. The Spiritual Canticle of St. John of the Cross is narrated by people undergoing this practice, which was called the \"seventh mansion\" of the Interior Castle by St. (*) Teresa of \u00c1vila. Matthew 25 compares the Kingdom of Heaven to five wise and five foolish torchbearers waiting to undergo this practice. Revelation 19:9 describes a supper celebrating the Lamb undergoing this practice, which was performed in a vision by a saint martyred on a spiked wheel. For 10 points, name this ceremony contrasted with spiritual union, whose \"mystical\" form, as practiced by St. Catherine, is the subject of bridal theology.", "Mysticism", "H"]
["The Armenian form of this action is performed at the entrance to churches and is called matagh. One example of this act ended with the lighting of a fire from which all fires in the city were lit in the New Fire ceremony. This action is performed on Mount Gerizim on Passover by the Samaritans. This action was performed once a month at the tomb of Cyrus the Great in a manner similar to the Vedic ritual that employs a hundred gold and silver needles and a gilded (*) chariot, and which is called the Ashvamedha. One Jewish form of this act is called a korbanot. In one ceremony of this action, a man was painted black and was given four wives; a flute was broken after that man climbed to the top of a pyramid, while dressed as Tezcatlipoca. In Old Testament tradition, this act was performed on a red heifer to purify those who touched corpses. For 10 points, name this religious rite involving the ritual slaughter of an animal", "Animal sacrifice", "H"]
["This artist's watercolors, including illustrations for The Beast in the Jungle and The Turn of the Screw, led Paul Rosenfeld to suspect \"an almost feminine refinement in his wash,\" a coded reference to this man's homosexuality. One of this man's paintings consists of a bunch of grapes, a pinecone, and a sickle with a red ribbon on its handle, all below the word \"Dove.\" In an oil painting, this artist used diagonal, fragmented planes to suggest an inspirational, spiritual dimension of a structure owned by the John W. E. Shelman Feed Company in his hometown of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, thereby linking it with the pyramids. This artist painted nine \"poster portraits\" of his friends, one of which shows shafts of light streaming from two streetlights in the midground and a sign reading \"Carlo.\" In that painting, he used gold leaf for the medium-sized copy of the title symbol, which appears at one end of a fire truck. For 10 points, name this Precisionist artist of I Saw the Figure 5 in Gold.", "Charles Demuth", "H"]
["According to one story, when a disciple of this rabbi returned with great wealth, this man calmed the jealousy of the others by filling up a whole valley with gold coins. In another story, he preserved his only set of clothes by burying himself naked in the sand while studying the Torah. Some traditions hold that the voice of God spoke out after this man disapproved of some farmers carrying on their lives instead of studying the Torah. He survived on the fruit of a magical carob tree and a spontaneously appearing spring during the thirteen years he spent studying the Torah in a cave with his son Eleazer. His yahrzeit is commemorated with shooting bows and arrows and lighting bonfires and occurs on the 33rd day of the Counting of the Omer. He is traditionally credited with writing a work that was actually written in the 13th century by the Spanish Kabbalist Moses de Leon. For 10 points, name this credited author of the Zohar, a student of Rabbi Akiva whose death is commemorated on Lag B'Omer", "Simeon bar Yochai", "H"]
["A description of this conflict contrasts one character's \"sun-bright chariot\" with a superior chariot that burns with \"thick flames.\" At the beginning of the second day of this conflict, a group of characters advance in a \"hollow cube\" in order to hide a recent invention. \"The Rape of the Lock\" parodied a scene in this conflict by describing how the Baron cuts a sylph in half using a pair of scissors. In that scene of this conflict, one character first experiences pain when a sword slices through him but is unable to kill him. On the first day of this conflict, a council resolves to dig up \"sulphurous and nitrous foam\" in order to create gunpowder. In response, a group of characters uproot and throw mountains in this conflict to bury the other side's cannons. This conflict ends with the Son charging into battle and driving the enemy forces into Chaos, where they fall for nine days before waking up in a lake of fire. For 10 points, name this conflict that Raphael describes to Adam in Book 6 of Paradise Lost.", "War in Heaven", "H"]
["Members of this country's Union of the Plant drink hoasca tea to induce psychedelic hallucinations. One of this country's festivals includes the Washing of Bonfim, and in another festival, many people faint while holding a rope connected to an image of Our Lady of Nazareth. This country contains the world's largest following of Kardecist Spiritism, due in large part to the popularity of psychographic author Chico Xavier. In 1995, a televangelist kicked an icon of this country's patron saint during a live broadcast on that saint's feast day. This country, whose patron saint is Our Lady of Aparecida, is home to a religion whose adherents worship ancestral spirits called Baba Egum and attend terreiro to perform dancing ceremonies honoring orixas. This country's Yoruba-based religions include Umbanda and Candomble\u0301. For 10 points, name this country that is home to a giant statue of Christ the Redeemer near Rio de Janeiro.", "", "H"]
["According to Ibn Abi Zayd, a member of this group should give the greeting \"on you,\" and the proper response is \"on you a stone.\" Wahhabi scholar Abd al-Aziz ibn Baz weighed in affirmatively on the controversy over whether those in this group can be labeled mushrikeen. Relations with this group are often said to be governed by the terms of the apocryphal Pact of Umar. This group is characterized by adherence to a doctrine that was allegedly changed in the practice of tahrif. One mysterious constituency within this group, whose members were said to adhere to the Zabur, consists of the Sabians. Most members of this group are adherents of the Injil or Taurat. Members of this group, which is described by a term contrasted with ahl al-fatrah, are able to achieve dhimmi status by paying the jizya tax. For 10 points, name this term from Islamic theology that signifies a monotheistic group that adheres to revealed scriptures, namely Jews and Christians.", "People of the Book", "H"]
["The translator's preface to Swami Vivekananda's version of this book claims that it echoes the theme of the Bhagavad Gita. In one chapter, this book references Job's assertion that \"the life of man upon earth is a warfare\" in warning against temptation, which it argues \"steels the just\" like fire tempers iron. This book contains an aphorism that is often translated as \"man proposes, God disposes.\" This book's fourth section begins with an invitation to consume bread and wine, and its third section takes the form of a dialogue between the reader and the title figure. This book takes its title from its first section, which advocates despising all vanities on earth and contains the quote \"how quickly passes the glory of the world.\" Four sections, including \"Directives for the Interior Life\" and \"Helpful Counsels of the Spiritual Life,\" make up this book, which was written by a member of the Devotio Moderna movement in the 1400s. For 10 points, name this Catholic devotional by Thomas a\u0300 Kempis.", "The Imitation of Christ", "H"]
["The poem Sone von Nausay reveals that this man is actually the Fisher King who conquered Nordic barbarians while marrying the princess of Norway to become Norway's king. In another legend, he is killed by a giant pagan named Dilantes. With his similarly named son, this man is able to save the Saracen king Evalach from King Tholomes's army by converting Evalach to Christianity. His sister Havingues is a maternal ancestor of King Pelles. This grandfather of Yvain is the subject of an epic poem by Robert de Boron, in which he is imprisoned for 42 years until Emperor Vespasian releases him. In some stories, this man visited Glastonbury and thrust his staff into a hill to create a thorn tree; other legends state that he was given the bleeding lance by Longinus before he came to Britain. For 10 points, name this Biblical character who supposedly brought the grail to England, and who was the man who donated his tomb to Jesus.", "Joseph of Arimathea", "H"]
["In multiple Romantic treatments of this man, columns are decorated with a motif in which a snake coils around the pillar. A thunderstorm and the planet Astarte behind some clouds can be seen in an outdoor depiction of this man that shows hundreds of people on three different stories of his mile-long palace. Gilbert Stuart told the artist of another depiction of this man that the perspective was wrong, so that artist destroyed the canvas and spent 25 years working on-and-off on another depiction. That version, which shows this man next to some gold drinking vessels, was inspired by John Martin's treatment and was painted by Washington Allston. In a Baroque painting, this man wears a richly brocaded cloak over his under-robe and has a white turban as his open hand hangs over the head of a woman in red who almost drops a jug of liquid. In that version, this man gazes at an ethereal, disembodied hand. For 10 points, name this Biblical character whom Rembrandt showed looking at the Writing on the Wall.", "Belshazzar", "H"]
["One theologian with this name argued that, to combat evil, we must remember that we will die and also remember the benefits of heaven in Treatise on the Seven Spiritual Weapons. Another Italian theologian of this name claimed that those in purgatory see the true glory of God in the tract Treatise on Purgatory. In addition to those Bolognese and Genoese theologians, another thinker of this name, who is the subject of a Sigrid Undset biography, uttered \"be what you are meant to be and you will set the entire world alight!\" That thinker of this name received a vision in which she was married to Jesus Christ and wrote a letter urging Gregory XI to bring the papacy back from Avignon to Rome. Another woman of this name was eventually beheaded after the breaking wheel on which she was being tortured broke. For 10 points, give this name of various saints, including a woman from Siena and a martyr from Alexandria.", "St. Catherine", "H"]
["A specialized form of this action involving the fingers is central to the Shiva Swarodaya or Swara Yoga text, which associates this action done on the left side with the Ida nadi and this action done on the right side with the Pingala nadi. Sama vritti is the practice of doing the purak and rechak parts of this action in equal time, which may be elongated with a kumbhak, or \"pot,\" stage. The \"extension of the life force,\" or pranayama, is a term for a group of techniques for this action, one of which, \"victory,\" or ujjayi, produces an oceanic sound. In Eastern Orthodox Hesychast practices, regularizing this action accompanies the recital of the Jesus Prayer. The Hebrew phrase \"nishmat chayim\" describes the first instance of God performing this action that, in John 20:22, Christ performs on the apostles before saying \"receive ye the Holy Ghost.\" For 10 points, name this action that causes the first man to come alive after God does it into Adam's nostrils.", "Breathing", "H"]
["The 61st verse of this text criticizes people who claim that a holy man is \"an ear\" or \"only ears.\" This text states that people who hoard gold and silver will have their wealth heated by the fires of hell and branded on their bodies, but that believers will live forever in gardens with rivers flowing through them. This text claims that Jews believe God had a son named Uzair, whom scholars typically identify with either Azariah or Ezra. The vastness of the earth becomes too narrow for the losers of the Battle of Hunayn in this text, which forbids \"postponement,\" or nasi, of the four sacred months. This text, which continually references events surrounding the Battle of Tabuk, includes a command to besiege, ambush, and otherwise seek to eliminate unbelievers in its controversial \"Sword verse.\" This surah of the Quran is the only one that does not begin with \"Bismillah.\" For 10 points, name this surah, the English- translated name of which references its declaration that idolaters must convert or die.", "Umayr ibn Sad al-Ansari", "H"]
["An example of these structures designed by Louis Bourgeois, who died before he could design its interior, was built with white Portland cement. The first of these buildings, constructed under the supervision of Vakilu\u00e2\u0080\u0099d Dawlih, was demolished in 1963 and located in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan. These structures, which are literally called \u00e2\u0080\u009cdawning places,\u00e2\u0080\u009d have an interlocking function with regional and world \u00e2\u0080\u009ccenters.\u00e2\u0080\u009d An egg-shaped dome covered with oval tiles characterizes a Panama City structure of this type, and the one in India is comprised of 27 \u00e2\u0080\u009cpetals.\u00e2\u0080\u009d These buildings, which face a shrine in Akka and are inscribed with the Greatest Name, include the \u00e2\u0080\u009cMother Temple of the West\u00e2\u0080\u009d in Wilmette, Illinois, and the Lotus Temple in Delhi. They must not contain pulpits, altars, or images, and must take a quasi-circular, nine-sided shape. For 10 points, name these buildings for worshipping the religion of Baha\u00e2\u0080\u0099ullah.", "Baha\u00e2\u0080\u0099i Houses of Worship ", "H"]
["This concept is the subject of the folk song \"Balsam Flowers.\" This concept is illustrated by a parable in which a hunter nearly shoots a boy who disguised himself as a fawn to obtain deer's milk. The Buddha explains why men's bones are heavy and white but women's bones are light and black in an apocryphal sutra dealing with this concept that includes a lengthy description of pregnancy. This concept manifested itself in the illegal but popular practice of ge\u0304gu\u0306 [GUH-goo], which involved people making soup out of their own flesh. Master Mou argued that monks do not disavow this concept by shaving their heads and withdrawing from society. The Thirteen Classics includes a text named for this concept that calls it \"the root of all virtue and the stem out of which grows all moral teaching.\" The Chinese word \"xiao\" signifies this concept that is central to role ethics. For 10 points, name this Confucian doctrine that children should revere their parents.", "Filial piety", "H"]
["As recently as the late imperial period, an 18-armed form of this figure known as Cundi [\"tsun-di\"] was popular among various esoteric-practicing communities in China. Adherents of the Tiantai school identify six different forms of this figure, each corresponding to a realm of existence, including pretas, asuras, and devas. In Tibet, this figure is believed to have been a co-disciple of Vajrapani, and has seven forms, including one with eleven faces and another with the head of a horse. Chapter 25 of a Mahayana text describes 33 manifestations of this figure, who vows to aid every sentient being. In China, this figure possesses a thousand arms and is venerated as the lord of the world known as Guanyin. The mantra \"om mani padme hum,\" which roughly translates to \"purifying jewel in the lotus,\" is associated with the four- armed version of this figure who is alternately known as the \"lotus holder.\" For 10 points, name this bodhisattva who embodies the compassion of all Buddhas.", "Avalokiteshvara ", "H"]
["The man of this name had sons named Riphath and Togarmah. The woman of this name bore three children: a son named after the valley where God promised to break the bow of Israel, a daughter named for the fact that God will no longer have mercy on Israel, and a son named for God's claim that \"ye are not my people, and I will not be your God.\" According to the Table of Nations, the man of this name had three sons, the eldest of whom is the namesake of the Ashkenazi tribe. The mention of the woman of this name prompts an extended metaphor in which God claims that he will rebuke Israel and will only restore it when god is called \"husband,\" not \"master.\" The woman of this name, the daughter of Diblaim and mother of Lo-Ammi, Lo-Ruhamah, and Jezreel, is redeemed for 15 pieces of silver and a quantity of barley after she is loved by another man adulterously. For 10 points, give this shared name of the eldest son of Japheth and the \"promiscuous woman\" whom God told Hosea to marry.", "Gomer", "H"]
["The widely memorized poem \"A Night Mooring by Maple Bridge\" describes hearing the bells of the Cold Mountain one of these structures. One of these structures is named in honor of the mount of Kumarajiva, who transported scriptures. The Yufo one of these structures houses a noted jade statue. The \"Flying Peak,\" which legendarily transported itself from (*) India, is found at another one of these structures, the Soul's Retreat or Lingyin one. Another one of these structures is found on Mount Song and is home to the Pagoda Forest. For 10 points, identify this kind of Chinese religious building, examples of which include the home of martial arts-practicing monks at Shaolin.", "Standard Design for Buddhist Temple Construction", "H"]
["One religion from this country uses a list of 21 precepts including \"live as the sun\" and \"life is art\" as its holy text. Another faith from this country worships a deity called El Cantare and publishes messages from spirits of politicians in an online journal called The Liberty. This home of both the Church of Perfect Liberty and Happy Science also produced a monotheistic religion which teaches \"a thing lent, a thing borrowed\" and promotes the Joyous Life. A group from this country that began as a Nichiren Buddhist lay organization is called Soka Gakkai. A cult from this country renamed itself to Aleph and earlier launched a sarin attack on a subway. For 10 points, name this country whose new religions, or shinshukyo, include Tenrikyo and Aum Shinrikyo.", "Japan", "H"]
["On one of these days, meat is divided into three portions, one of which is set aside for the poor. On one of these days, a vermicelli pudding called Sheer Kurma is served, part of the reason that day is called \"sweet.\" One of these days is dedicated to a miracle in which a boy was swapped with a ram. Idgahs are open-air places for special prayers performed on these days during which six extra takbirs are recited and no call to prayer happens. One of these days commemorates Abraham's willingness to sacrifice a son, while another comes at the end of Ramadan. For 10 points, name these Islamic festivals, one of which celebrates the \"breaking of the fast\" or fitr.", "Eid", "H"]
["In Primitive Mythology, Joseph Campbell discusses one of these objects where the souls of Shamans are reared, called \"Tuuru.\" Abram settles in Hebron and pitches his tent near these objects named after Mamre, and King David's general Joab kills Absalom after discovering him in one of these things. In Mark, Jesus curses one of these things before he clears the temple of the moneylenders, and Zacchaeus is in one of these when Jesus tells him that he is going to Zacchaeus' house. The Vajrashila is where the Buddha sat at one of these things when he found enlightenment, which is called Bodhi. For 10 points, identify this living thing whose fruit of \"Knowledge of Good and Evil\" was responsible for Adam and Eve's expulsion from the Garden of Eden.", "Tree", "H"]
["In one holiday of this religion, participants carry saffron-colored triangular flags in a military parade; that holiday is Hola Mahalla. The literature of this religion includes accounts of its founder's life called janam-sakhi, and manuals that detail its Rahit code. This religion's houses of worship include an eatery called a langar. One leader of this religion assembled a group called the Panj Piare, or \"Cherished Five,\" and commenced the amrit sanskar nectar ceremony to initiate them into the Khalsa. Members of this religion may wear a ceremonial sword and uncut hair as part of its Five K's. For 10 points, name this Indian religion founded by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "H"]
["Some dissidents from this movement believe ritviks can initiate disciples of this movement's founder. The Palace of Gold was built in this movement's colony of New Vrindaban; that colony was expelled by this movement in 1988. This movement publishes the Back to Godhead magazine and distributes meals through the non-profit Food For Life. The translation Bhagavad Gita As It Is was produced by this movement's founder. Taking its name from the Maha Mantra, this Gaudiya Vaishnava movement advocates bhakti toward the namesake lover of Radha, who is identified with Vishnu. For 10 points, name this modern Hindu movement founded by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, popular among Western people like The Beatles.", "International Society for Krishna Consciousness", "H"]
["Isaiah describes one of these which is \"bathed in heaven\" and after the opening of the second seal in Revelation, the rider of the red horse is given a great one of these objects. Another figure in Revelation is called faithful and true and has fiery eyes, diadems on his head, and one of these objects coming out of his mouth. In Judges, Ehud conceals one of these objects when he meets with Eglon. In Ephesians 6, Paul says to take several objects including the gospel of peace, an object to extinguish Satan's fiery arrows, and one of these objects \"of the Spirit, which is the word of God\". The angel Uriel stands guarding the garden of Eden with a flaming one of these and according to Isaiah, people will beat them into ploughshares. For 10 points, name this weapon that David took from Goliath and used to behead him.", "Sword", "H"]
["Clergy of this religious branch go on a yearly retreat called Vassa during the wet season. One scripture from this religious branch tells of a king who gives away a rain-bringing white elephant and his two children. That story is found in part of the Khuddaka Nikaya. This religious branch's path to salvation is described through seven stages of purification in the Visuddhimagga, which was written by Buddhaghosa. The vipassana movement includes schools from this branch that emphasize the three marks of existence. Groups including Vinaya and Abhidhamma are found in this branch's central collection of texts, which constitute the Tipitaka, or Pali Canon. For 10 points, name this school of Buddhism contrasted with Mahayana.", "Theravada", "H"]
["This man's father died in Ur of the Chaldees. From that place, he traveled with his grandfather and uncle to go to Canaan, ultimately settling in Haran. To prevent quarreling over cattle, his traveling companion suggested they part ways and allowed this man to choose left or right. This man fathered the patriarchs of the Moabites and Ammonites when his two daughters got him drunk so that he would impregnate them. This man offered his virgin daughters instead of his two angel visitors to a mob outside his door. Those angels helped this man and his family leave that city which was about to be destroyed because he was the only righteous man in it. For 10 points, name this nephew of Abraham whose wife turned into a pillar of salt when she turned back to look upon the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.", "Lot", "H"]
["The oldest liturgy still in use that includes this concept is the Liturgy of St. James, which uses the Syriac term Qurbana to describe it. Martin Luther argued that the Catholic interpretation of this concept had been polluted by the use of Aristotelian physics, and the papal encyclical Mysterium Fidei rejects another interpretation of this concept. Open and closed varieties of this action are practiced by various Christian denominations, with the extreme occurring when catechumens are dismissed from the church before it. This sacrament is viewed as a recreation of the Lord's Supper, and believers in transubstantiation contend that its elements become the flesh and blood of Christ. For 10 points, name this sacrament that involves the consecration of bread and wine.", "Eucharist", "H"]
["This figure was imprisoned by a king after arguing with his court seers and priests for three days, but was freed after he cured the king's favorite horse. Seven sections called burino are included in a chapter that provides an account of this figure's birth, the Spend Nask. This figure authored a hymn whose fifth section praises the Apas, or waters of the world, and he received his first vision while bathing in a river and encountering a being named Vohu Manah. This son of Poroshasp and author of the Gathas preached a religion in which the evil Angra Mainyu eternally opposed the good Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this prophet and namesake of a dualistic Persian religion.", "Zoroaster", "H"]
["This man describe customs as a tree is cut from the forest and decked with silver and gold; that represents \"the way of the heathen\", which he instructed the people of his city not to learn. When he first hears the word of God, he is told, \"Before I formed you in the womb, I knew you\". He's not John, but his namesake book contains the passage upon which the doctrine of the New Covenant is based. A book written by him has five poems, four of which are acrostics, and is read by Jews on Tisha B'Av. This man wears a yoke on his neck as he prophesies destruction for his city and his annoyingness got him beaten up and thrown into a cistern by King Zedekiah. For ten points, name this prophet who complains about the sack of Jerusalem and destruction of the temple by Nebuchadnezzar in his Lamentations.", "Jeremiah", "H"]
["One figure important to this religion invoked the \"Solace of the Eye\" in his commentary on the Surah of Joseph. That person declared to Mull\u00e1 Husayn that he was the promised successor to the Shaykhi movement and then was independently recognized by each of the eighteen people he designated as Letters of the Living. Future plans to establish one of this faith's places of worship, a Mashriqu'l-Adhk\u00e1r, is discussed in the 2014 version of the Ri\u1e0dv\u00e1n message. The governing assembly of this faith was founded at the culmination of its ten year plan for expansion, which was implemented by this faith's Guardian Shogi Effendi. For ten points, name this faith which is governed by the Universal House of Justice and which was founded by Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["William Wrede proposed the existence of a \"messianic secret\" in this man's writings. Coptic Christians identify this man with a figure who accompanied Barnabas to Cyprus. This person recorded a parable describing the kingdom of God as akin to a \"growing seed.\" Christian Weisse's two-source hypothesis holds that, along with the Q source, this man's writings were used as a source for two other writers. This founder of the Church of Alexandria is often symbolized by a sword-wielding winged lion. Some of this saint's body was moved to Venice, which adopted him as its patron saint. The gospel attributed to him was once considered an epitome of Matthew. For 10 points, name this evangelist to whom the second and oldest gospel is attributed.", "Mark the Evangelist", "M"]
["Philosophers such as Antony Flew and Michael Martin have contrasted the strong/hard form of this intellectual position with its weak/soft form. This position is described as \"fallibilist\" or \"friendly\" when one who holds it accepts that those who disagree can be justified in their own beliefs. Sam Harris is an exemplar of this position's so-called \"New\" form, which aggressively counters the beliefs of those who oppose it. A U.S. military chaplain is thought to have first said this position does not exist in foxholes. FTP, what dogma takes its name from the Greek for \"without God\"?", "Atheism", "M"]
["This system became more fixed when the so-called \"gates of ijtihad\" were \"closed\" in the tenth century CE. Hanbali and Hanafi are schools of \"fiqh\" under the larger aegis of this system, the latter of which emphasizes istihsan, or discretion, more than other schools. Kemal Ataturk banned the application of this system in Turkey, but it has been applied in 11 states in Nigeria since 2000 and remains the basis for the court system in Saudi Arabia. FTP what is this Islamic legal code?", "Sharia", "M"]
["The Universal Fellowship of Metropolitan Community Churches is the only Christian denomination specifically designed for this community. The 2007 Mormon pamphlet titled \"God Loveth His Children\" was addressed to members of this community to clarify the LDS church's stance regarding them. The Dalai Lama said in a 1997 speech that members of this community deserve protection from discrimination while acts constituting this status could fit Buddhist definitions of \"misconduct.\" FTP some Christians use Leviticus as pretext for discriminating against what community, using the passage stating it's an \"abomination\" for a man to lie with a man?", "LGBT", "M"]
["In Mayan myth, people in this role may travel \"the good path\" guided by Tlaloc through the world of dreams. The Korean word for people in this role is mudang; they are typically female. The American Zen Buddhist writer Joan Halifax's 1988 book titled for this religious role took its subtitle, \"Wounded Healer,\" from a Jungian archetype. Like the Peruvian curandero, these people typically fulfill healing and psychic leadership roles in animist tribes. FTP, what name is given to those who connect the spiritual world with the physical, sometimes mistakenly called \"witch doctors\"?", "Shamanism", "M"]
["One man in this work asks a crowd of people, \"If ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love\u0085can ye feel so now?\" Early in this book, a man sees a vision of a \"dark and dreary waste\" that people are able to navigate by holding on to a rod of iron. Men in this work like Sherem and Korihor are given the sobriquet of \"anti-Christ.\" One group in this book is led by a compass called the Liahona, that group later founds the city of Zarahemla. Sections of this book are titled after men like Jacob, Alma, and Helaman, and the main peoples in this work are divided into Lamanites and Nephites. FTP, name this religious text supposedly translated from golden plates by Joseph Smith, Jr.", "Book of Mormon", "M"]
["Adherents of the Bahai faith participate in this practice during their month of Ala. The Talmud directs Jews to do this to commemorate the destruction of the First and Second Temples, and in Hebrew this practice is called tzomot. Devout Catholics between the ages of 18 and 59 are obliged to do this on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday. The visual sighting of the crescent moon inaugurates the best-known example of this religious practice. FTP sawm is Arabic for what practice associated in Islam with Ramadan?", "Fasting", "M"]
["In the usual interregnum preceding this action and during it, the Camerlengo is in charge of all deliberations. Discussions of candidates during this process are called \"congregations\" and are always led by the Bishop of Ostia. Immediately prior to this taking place, the \"master of liturgical celebrations\" is required to call out \"extra omnes\" before sealing the Sistine Chapel. Participants in this process vote three times a day, and if a 2/3 majority is not achieved, a day of mass and prayer must be held before the next congregation. FTP this describes what process which, upon completion, leads to white smoke being visible in St. Peter's square, followed by the announcement \"Habemus Papam!\"", "Papal conclave", "M"]
["In this book, a Pharisee [FAIR-uh-see] named Nicodemus asks, \"How can a man be born when he is old?\" This book includes a person saying \"go and sin no more\" to a woman taken in adultery. In this book, Jesus refers to himself as the \"bread of life\" and interrupts the Last Supper to wash the disciples' feet. The seven signs in this book include the raising of Lazarus from the dead. Chapter three, verse sixteen of this book states, \"God so loved the world, that he gave his one and only son.\" FTP, what is this not-synoptic gospel, which usually is placed after Matthew, Mark, and Luke.", "Gospel of John", "M"]
["Baha'i adherents may carry these objects to help with recitations. Like those found in Islamic traditions, these are kept in numerical accordance to the names of God. In Zen Buddhism, collections of these usually number 108; only the first hundred are used to count out spoken mantras. The paternoster and chotki are forerunners to these meditative objects commonly used in Christian denominations. Frequently used to focus the petitioner's thoughts and spiritual energies, FTP, what are these religious objects, a necklace type of which is a rosary?", "Daisy Buchanan", "M"]
["The faithful are enjoined to enter these structures right-foot first, and upon entering one uses the sardivan to perform ablutions. The largest room in this type of structure is generally free of furniture to maximize space for worshippers and is called the musallah That room in these structures will often include a raised platform called a minbar and will also feature a mihrab, a niche indicating the qibla, the direction of prayer. Minarets often adorn, FTP, what prayer structures in Islam?", "Mosque", "M"]
["Practitioners of this religion are sometimes called \"servants of the spirits\" and its name appears to have been first recorded in 1658's Doctrina Christiana, a document sent back to King Philip II of Spain describing it. In this faith the soul is split into two parts, known as the big and little \"good angel\". Adherents pay fealty to figures like the rain spirit Simbi and a set of twins called The Marasa, who are the offspring of this religion's chief \u0096 and unreachable \u0096 deity, the Bondye. FTP, loa are propitiated in what religion also featuring Papa Legba, a faith originating in Haiti?", "Voodoo", "M"]
["The main texts of this religion are preserved in purvas--the Agamas contain the teachings of the last of its 24 ideal spiritual figures, all of which are not governed by kashayas, or personal desires. Those 24 holy figures of this faith serve to help followers achieve moksha, or liberation from the cycle of death and rebirth, reflected in the origin of their name from words meaning \"ford-builders.\" Some Orthodox adherents of this religion sweep the floor before them to avoid stepping on insects. Divided into Svetambara and Digambara sects, FTP, what is this Indian religion that practices ahimsa, or the path of nonviolence?", "Jainism", "M"]
["10. One member of this order created a map of China known as the \"Impossible Black Tulip.\" Another member of this order founded Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan and, along with Louis Joliet, mapped the northern part of the Mississippi River. This order, which was approved by the papal bull Regimini militantis Ecclesiae, was founded by a man who lost both his legs at the Battle of Pamplona, after which he wrote the Spiritual Exercises. Members of this order included Matteo Ricci and Jacques Marquette. This order of Christianity flourished in Japan during the mission of its adherent Francis Xavier. FTP, name this Catholic order founded by Ignatius of Loyola.", "Society of Jesus", "M"]
["The Nestorian minister Alopen was the first to bring Christianity to this country, around 655 CE. An 81-part sacred text from this country opens by claiming \"the name that can be named is not the eternal Name.\" This country's folklore includes a Queen Mother of the West who tends to immortality-granting peaches. A faith founded in this country advocates action through inaction, in accordance with the ineffable Way. For 10 points, name this modern-day country which reveres the Jade Emperor, and which is the place of origin of Daoism and Confucianism.", "China", "M"]
["This text's twenty-fourth section features the parable of a lamp in a niche, lit from an olive tree of neither the east nor the west. Exorcisms are sometimes aided by reciting this text's \"Throne Verse.\" Adherents believe that this text was first heard on the Night of Power in a cave on Mount Nur, as delivered by the angel Gabriel. \"The Cow\" is the longest section of this text, which is holier than the hadith. Almost all of its 114 suras begin with the word \"Bismillah.\" For 10 points, name this set of revelations to the prophet Muhammad, the holiest book of Islam.", "Quran", "M"]
["In Eastern Orthodox Christianity, this substance makes up the prosphoron prior to its ritual use. The name of Bethlehem literally means \"house of\" this substance. During the first of Jesus's three temptations, Satan asks him to turn stones into this substance. In Judaism, the \"Hamotzi\" blessing is recited over this substance, and egg is used to help make a braided type of this food called challah. For 10 points, name this type of food which, in Catholicism, constitutes the host that transubstantiates into the body of Christ.", "Bread", "M"]
["The Second Council of Nicaea affirmed hyperdulia as a form of devotion solely to this person, who is the subject of the Seven Sorrows devotion. In several Orthodox traditions, the Greek title theotokos is given to this person, to whom the Magnificat is dedicated. This person's \"falling asleep\" or death is commemorated by the Dormition. Sets of ten prayers dedicated to this figure comprise the Rosary. For 10 points, name this woman depicted in Madonna paintings, the virgin mother of Jesus.", "Mary", "M"]
["Like the Gospel of Luke, this Biblical book begins with a dedication to Theophilus. Seven Greek deacons are appointed in this book, including a man whose stoning is ordered by the Sanhedrin. In this book, a mighty wind descends upon 120 followers fifty days after the Resurrection. When a man on the road to Damascus is blinded by holy light in this book, he decides to convert and change his name from Saul to Paul. For 10 points, name this book which describes the deeds of Jesus' followers.", "Acts of the Apostles", "M"]
["A song about this holiday mentioning the consumption of \"pastelikos\" and \"almendrikas\" was written in the Sephardic language Ladino. This holiday was first celebrated under the Hasmonean dynasty. Shammai argued against Hillel that the shamash should be used one fewer time on each successive day of this holiday, which begins in the month of Kislev. This holiday celebrates the defeat of Antiochus IV's Hellenistic army by Judah Maccabee. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday whose eight nights correspond to candles on the menorah.", "Hanukkah", "M"]
["One text in this language sees a god shatter a serpent's 99 forts in order to release water into the rivers. Schools of thought differ on the interpretation of the sentence \"thou art that,\" or tat tvam asi, in this language's liturgy. Some hymns in this language address a god who eats offerings of clarified butter with his tongues of flame; others describe the brewing of the beverage soma. Interpretive texts called Upanishads were written in this language, along with hymns to Agni and the storm god Indra. For 10 points, name this ancient Indian language used to write the Vedas.", "Sanskrit", "M"]
["This country's constitution is based on the concept of \"guardianship of the jurist.\" Decrees in this country have banned a practice of cutting oneself with a sword, a practice that often occurs alongside tazieh passion plays on the holiday of Ashura. An ancient religion from this modern-day country had concepts of evil and good called Druj and asha and believed that Ahriman was in conflict with Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this Shi'a-majority country and historic home of Zoroastrianism that is now led by Ayatollah Ali Khamene'i.", "", "M"]
["Thirteen attributes of this figure are the focus of the selichot read in the lead-up to the High Holidays. Sahih Muslim reports that this figure \"loves odd numbers\" because this figure has 99 names, such as al-Aziz and al-Ghaffar, in Islam. This figure's emanations are known as sephirot in Kabbalah mysticism. This figure is frequently referred to as \"the Beneficent, the Merciful\" or ar-rahmani ar-rahim in the Koran. For 10 points, identify this monotheistic deity venerated in Abrahamic religions.", "God", "M"]
["An account of this location is given by Chinese ambassador Zhou Daguan. This location has two artificial, rectangular lakes called Barays, both of which include temples on islands in their centers. It served as the capital for a dynasty led by Jayavarman and Suryavarman, and it sits on the Siam Reap River. A large temple dedicated to Vishnu is found at this location, whose other archeological sites include the Preah Khan. For 10 points, identify this location where many temples, such as the 'Wat,' were constructed by the Khmer empire in Cambodia.", "Angkor", "M"]
["One of these works says to remove the plank from one's own eye before removing the sawdust in the eyes of others. A rich fool dies on the same day he builds a bigger barn in one of these works, while in another, a servant whose ten thousand talent debt to the king is forgiven imprisons a fellow servant for not paying a debt of only a hundred denarii. One of these tells of a son who (*) wasted his fortune but is still welcomed home by his father, and another tells of a beaten-up traveler who is ignored by a priest and a Levite passing by on the road. For ten points, name these stories, including those of the Prodigal Son and the Good Samaritan, which the Christian Messiah used to teach his followers.", "Parables of Jesus", "M"]
["Special alcoves are placed on tombs in a festival in this religion that \"feeds the dead\", and the tamb\u00fa drum is played at its religious services. Practitioners of this religion believe in entities like luga-rou and baka and claim that people have two inner forces, the gros bon ange and ti bon ange. Female and male priests in this religion are known as (*) Mambos and Houngans, respectively. While this religion acknowledges the supreme god Bondye, lesser entities like the tuxedo-wearing Baron Samedi and the crossroads guardian Papa Legba, known as loa, are the primary means of communication. For ten points, identify this Haitian syncretic religion that has namesake dolls.", "Voodoo", "M"]
["Jesus and Mary allegedly presented this man with a copy of the Gospels and an omophorion after he was imprisoned for slapping Arius across the face at the First Council of Nicaea. In one story, he gave bags of gold to three poor girls who could not afford a dowry. This patron saint of sailors and fishermen also served as a Bishop of (*) Myra, and his namesake day is celebrated on December 6 and involves a tradition derived from his habit of donating coins in shoes and other gift-giving acts. For ten points, name this saint who provided the inspiration for the legend of Santa Claus.", "Saint Nicholas", "M"]
["One story from this religion tells of a man who continually tries to run away from his shadow, yet never thinks to sit under the shade of a tree. A key figure from this religion once wondered whether he dreamt of a butterfly or the butterfly dreamt of him. Practitioners of this religion attempt to attain the concept of non-action, or (*) \"wu wei.\" This religion, whose deities include the Immortal Eight and the Jade Emperor, describes the interconnectedness of opposite forces through the concepts of yin and yang. For ten points, identify this Chinese religion which advocates \"the way\" and was founded by Laozi.", "Taoism", "M"]
["Combinations of sujud and ruku are performed during this action, which can be divided into varieties like fajr and isha based on the time of day. Qasr is a shortening of this action due to travel constraints. Wudu is typically carried out before this action, which must be performed towards (*) qibla. The call to perform this action used to be made by muezzins, but is now typically made by loudspeakers installed on minarets. Practitioners of this action, mandated by the pillar of salat, prostrate themselves on special mats. For ten points, identify this action that Muslims perform five times a day in the direction of Mecca.", "Prayer", "M"]
["This religion divides time into repeating cycles of happiness and sorrow known as Kalacakra. The Agamas and the biographical Kalpa Sutra are among the texts of this religion. One sect in this religion believes Mallinath was a woman, and members of its other notable sect do not (*) wear clothes. Some practitioners of this religion wear masks to avoid accidentally swallowing insects. This religion, which is separated in Svetambara and Digambara sects, venerates the twenty-fourth Tirthankara, Mahavira. For ten points, identify this Indian religion that emphasizes the principle of non-violence, or ahimsa.", "Jainism", "M"]
["This religion divides time into repeating cycles of happiness and sorrow known as Kalacakra. The Agamas and the biographical Kalpa Sutra are among the texts of this religion. One sect in this religion believes Mallinath was a woman, and members of its other notable sect do not (*) wear clothes. Some practitioners of this religion wear masks to avoid accidentally swallowing insects. This religion, which is separated in Svetambara and Digambara sects, venerates the twenty-fourth Tirthankara, Mahavira. For ten points, identify this Indian religion that emphasizes the principle of non-violence, or ahimsa.", "Jainism", "M"]
["One philosopher from this movement divided \"protreptic,\" \"elenctic,\" and \"instructional\" modes of consultation and claimed that the faculty of \"prohairesis\" separates humans from other animals. Arrian compiled the text Discourses from this school, which developed the concept of pneuma. This school's followers included Cleanthes and Epictetus, and one (*) Roman emperor wrote a set of 12 books on this philosophy entitled Meditations. This school emphasized that \"virtue is sufficient for happiness.\" Marcus Aurelius was a member of, for ten points, what ancient school of philosophy founded by Zeno of Citium that advocated freedom from emotion?", "Stoicism", "M"]
["According to Mormons, this figure was the human form of the archangel Gabriel. The seventy-first sura of the Qur'an is named after this figure and details how Allah created the Sun and Moon. Black slavery was sometimes justified by an incident in which this figure cursed his grandson to be the \"lowest of slaves.\" That incident occurred after this figure's son saw him passed out and (*) naked in a tent. This father of Shem, Japheth, and Ham received an olive leaf from a dove he had sent out to look for land, which led to his landing on Mount Ararat and the formation of the Rainbow Covenant with God. For ten points, identify this biblical figure who survived the great flood on his ark.", "Noah", "M"]
["The Vand Chhako pillar of this religion asks its practitioners to donate about 10% of their income to the needy, and its other two pillars are Naam Japo and Kirat Karo. Adherents of this religion avoid kam and krodh, and its Japji prayer begins with the Mul Mantra. Members of the (*) Khalsa Order of this religion are instructed to bear kesh, or long hair, and carry the kirpan dagger as part of the five K's. Arjan Dev compiled the central text of this religion. For ten points, identify this Indian religion whose eternal eleventh guru became the Adi Granth after Gobind Singh died, and was founded by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["Members of the Bobo Ashanti sect of this religion worship Prince Emanuel Edwards. Followers of this religion's I-tal [EYE-tal] dietary code sometimes abstain from using salt, and \"reasoning\" ceremonies in this religion are aimed at communicating with their god (*) Jah. The formation of this religion was influenced by a Robert Athlyi Rogers work that declared Ethiopians to be the chosen people, called the Holy Piby, which is why members of it worship the Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie. For ten points, name this Afro-centric religion whose adherents include Bob Marley and smoke ganja.", "Rastafari", "M"]
["Controversy exists over shorter forms of this practice like misyar and mut'ah, which are carried out by some Twelver Shiites. In Orthodox Judaism, some people participate in a shidduch before engaging in this practice, which can result in the signing of a ketubah. According to Islamic law, a mahr must paid during this process, which is called a (*) Nikkah. Jesus transformed water into wine during one of these events at Cana, explaining why Catholics hold this practice to be a sacrament. For ten points, name this process, which in Christianity is facilitated by a priest joining a man and woman in matrimony", "Marriage", "M"]
["The papal bull Inter gravissimas \"restored\" one of these systems by implementing reforms proposed by Aloysius Lilius. Tithis and Karanas are subdivisions of Hindu ones, which end at the close of the Kali Yuga. One of these in the Baha'i faith contains intercalary periods to fill the gaps in the year left by (*) nineteen nineteen-day months. In Islam, the prohibition of the Nasi altered one of these systems that began on the Hijra. Lapses in the date of Easter were fixed by the Gregorian one. For ten points, name these systems which can be either solar or lunar and often contain twelve months.", "Ashadha", "M"]
["This man stayed in a jail cell with Silas before an earthquake opened the cell doors and saved a jailor from killing himself. After that incident, this man traveled to Paphos with Barnabas, where he met the false prophet Barjesus. One of his works claims that women should be silent in church and that (*) \"love is patient, love is kind.\" He was under the care of Ananias for three days after an incident in which he was knocked off of his donkey, blinded, and asked \"why do you persecute me?\" For ten points, name this Christian missionary who wrote some epistles to Corinth and was converted on the road to Damascus.", "Paul the Apostle", "M"]
["One song performed during this holiday asks \"mah nishtanah,\" while another repeats \"Dayenu\" while praising the good deeds of God. Participants of this holiday perform the rachtzah before eating a special foodstuff lacking chametz. During this holiday, children can negotiate for a reward after finding the (*) afikoman, a special half-piece of matzah. Participants symbolically use their little finger to place ten drops of wine on their plate to symbolize the plagues which struck the Pharaoh's lands during the main meal of this holiday, the seder. For ten points, name this holiday commemorating the Jewish exodus from Egypt.", "Passover", "M"]
["Several Hindus and Jains observe this practice in an event known as Ekadashi, which occurs roughly every eleventh day. Women may perform this action on Karva Chauth, and Mormons are asked to practice it the first Sundays of each month. In Judaism, this action occurs on the Tenth of (*) Tevet. Muslims recite the Fajr prayer before engaging in this practice, and in the evening, they end their ritual by using dates and water in an event called iftar. Jews are required to perform this action on Yom Kippur. For ten points, identify this abstention of food practiced by Muslims during the month of Ramadan.", "Fasting", "M"]
["This man defeated the Amalekites by holding his hands up through the duration of the battle. This figure mounted a brass serpent on a pole to save his followers from snakebites. After this figure struck rock with his staff to create water, he was forbidden from crossing the (*) Jordan River. While living as a shepherd in Midian, this figure married Zipporah and spoke to God through a burning bush. This leader, who was succeeded by Joshua, wrote the Torah and received the Ten Commandments on Mount Sinai. For ten points, identify this Biblical figure who parted the Red Sea when leading the Israelites on their exodus from Egypt.", "Moses", "M"]
["This doctrine was allegedly proven true when its subject appeared with a certain title to St. Bernadette at Lourdes. This concept was \"a singular grace and privilege of almighty God and by virtue of the merits of Jesus Christ.\" Its feast day was originally held in honor of St. Anne. Initially promulgated in Ineffabilis Deus [in-ehf-fah-BEE-lis DAY-oos] by Pius the Ninth, it did not exempt its subject from the temporal penalties of Adam. Name this Christian belief that original sin did not apply to the Virgin Mary.", "Immaculate Conception", "M"]
["According to Armenian legend, this person planted a long kiss on his mother's arm when ordered to bite it. In some Islamic sources, this person was born at the same time as Kelimia, and was slated to marry Lubda. In the Book of Matthew, Jesus compared the death of this person to the death of Zachariah son of Barachiah. The first shepherd, he sacrificed to God the firstlings of his flock, and the result drew the ire of his brother. This is the first person to die in The Bible. Name this second son of Adam and Eve, the brother of Cain.", "Cain and Abel", "M"]
["Ezekiel said that Noah, Daniel, and this man could save only themselves. In one encounter, this person cried that \"now my eye sees thee, therefore I despise myself and repent in dust and ashes.\" This man, called the greatest of the men of the East, was visited by Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar. This person was robbed of his cattle, children and health to determine whether he was truly pious towards God. Name this man who was the subject of a contest between God and Satan.", "Job", "H"]
["In Thailand, silk brocade is tied to a certain type of these objects to appease the Nang Takien spirit that lives in them. Shintos often decorate parts of the sakaki type of this thing with washi or silk to create tamagushi offerings to kami. Priests of the Oracle of Dodona divined Zeus' will by listening to a sacred one of these things. The Israeli Tu B'Shvat seder involves eating the their products and is also called the New (*) Year of these objects. The Vajrashila in front of a peepal one of these things marks where Buddha sat for a week before he reached enlightenment, and Eve was convinced by a snake to eat the fruit of one of these things. For 10 points, name these large plants, exemplified by the Bodhi, as well as those \"of Life\" and \"of Knowledge\".", "Tree", "H"]
["The Saptarishi granted a prince named Dhruva immortality as a star for his devotion to this figure, whose worship is the subject of the Bhagavata Purana. Six ways of surrendering to this figure are detailed in the Pancharatra, which also outlines the five manifestations of this figure. Followers of this god often wear a u-shaped tilaka made of mud on their foreheads. Many brahmin devotees of this god follow the teachings of (*) Ramanuja. This god is often depicted holding the Kaumodaki mace and a conch shell, and in one incarnation, this god becomes ruler of Ayodhya after rescued his wife from Ravana. This god rides the giant bird Garuda and his ten avatars include Rama and Krishna. For 10 points, name this Hindu preserver god who forms the trimurti with Brahma and Shiva.", "Vishnu", "H"]
["Both al-Nawawi and Imam Bahouti argued that this concept's fard kifaya, or community duties, include knowledge of divine law and da'wa. Ibn Rushd divided this concept into four types, including one form \"by the tongue\" that encompasses dua, or invoking God's name. In one hadith, Muhammad distinguished between the \"lesser\" form of this concept and the \"greater\", nafsah, form against the self and the ego. Bernard (*) Lewis has argued that the \"greater\" form of this concept is not peaceful resistance against the non-Muslim world but really this concept \"by the sword\", including military violence and contemporary Islamic terrorism. For 10 points, identify this Arabic term for \"struggle\", that is often used to mean Islamic holy war.", "Jihad", "H"]
["During one of these events, a girl is told \"Talitha Koum\". After one of these actions, its subject is told to wash in the Pool of Siloam. A man jumps off a ship from Bethsaida and exclaims \"save me!\" when he fails to imitate one of these occurrences. After another of of these actions, men of the law have no answer to the question \"if your ox fell in a well on the Sabbath, would you not immediately fish it out?\". In Bethany, a target of one of these is told to \"take your (*) shroud and go\", before which the sisters Mary and Martha were mourning the death of their brother, Lazarus. The first of these events was caused by Mary pleading for her son to help out wedding hosts at Cana. For 10 points, name these supernatural events like walking on the Sea of Galilee and turning water into wine that are carried out by the Son of God in the New Testament.", "Miracles of Jesus", "H"]
["The rich couple Sapphira and Ananias were struck dead after being rebuked by this figure for their greed. This man once resurrected a girl named Tabitha while on a journey to Lydda and Joppa, after which he had a dream in which God commanded him to eat non-kosher animals. This man quoted Psalm 118 in a speech to the Sanhedrin after healing a lame man at the Temple. This figure is denounced by (*) Paul in First Galatians for discriminating against non-Jewish converts. This man was called to follow Jesus while with his brother Andrew, and in Jerusalem, this man denied being a follower of Jesus three times. For 10 points, name this apostle of Jesus, the \"rock of the Church\", and the first pope.", "Peter", "H"]
["Celebrants of this holiday often sing \"Yedid Nefesh\" during the Seudah Shilshit. This holiday's time is increased by declaring \"Bo'i Kala\" right after the Amida, thus fulfilling the tosafot halakhah. This celebration grants believers a preview of Olam Haba, the time of the Messiah. A braided candle and spices are used to mark the end of this celebration during the havdalah, which begins when three (*) stars are sighted. Conservative and Orthodox believers avoid the 39 melachot during this holiday. A silver cup full of wine is blessed and passed during this celebration, after which two loaves of challah are shared. Its commemoration is required by the fourth Jewish commandment, and work is strictly forbidden. For 10 points, name this weekly Jewish day of rest.", "Celebrants of this holiday often sing \"Yedid Nefesh\" during the Seudah Shilshit. This holiday's time is increased by declaring \"Bo'i Kala\" right after the Amida, thus fulfilling the tosafot halakhah. This celebration grants believers a preview of Olam Haba, the time of the Messiah. A braided candle and spices are used to mark the end of this celebration during the havdalah, which begins when three ", "H"]
["One section of this work tells of a blacksmith and a carpenter who are \"wasting their time\u0085 feeding on ashes\" since they refuse to acknowledge that \"there is no God\" but God himself. The last third of this book contains four poems that about a \"suffering servant\" of the Lord. Another part of this book describes a figure who \"took up our pain and bore our sufferings\". In the sixth chapter of this work, the narrator is visited by fiery angels who cleanse his (*) mouth of wickedness with a hot coal, after which this book's narrator volunteers himself as a prophet to Israel. This book describes a voice \"crying out in the wilderness\" in this book predicts the coming one born of a young girl called \"Immanuel\". For 10 points, name this major prophetical book of the Old Testament that foretells the coming of Christ.", "Book of Isaiah", "H"]
["In the Gurbani, Bhagat Kabir argues that one type of this thing, \"Suma-pann\", does not possess the holiness of God's name, even when this substance is \"of the Ganges\". The fifth part of the Buddhist Pancasila regulates the personal use of this substance. In the fifth Surah, it is labeled an \"abomination of Satan's handiwork\" along with gambling. Contemporary interpretations of the \"Words of Wisdom\" encourage following a \"principle of promise\" and avoiding (*) \"hot drinks\" and this type of substance. During Catholic Eucharist, a variety of this substance is transubstantiated into the blood of Christ. For 10 points, name this type of liquid whose addiction is combated by the vaguely religious AA and comes in varieties like beer, wine, and vodka.", "Alcohol", "H"]
["One person of this name is the namesake of the most commonly used Byzantine rite of the Divine Liturgy. With Gregory Nazanius and Basil the Great, that man of this name is one of the Three Holy Hierarchs of Eastern Christianity. Another man with this name founded the Discalced Carmelites with Teresa of Avila and wrote of the difficult journey towards \"divine union\" with God's Love. In addition to the aforementioned \"golden (*) mouthed\" orator, this first name belonged to a man whose gospel contains seven discourses and another who prophesied the fall of the whore of Babylon and the opening of the seventh seal. For 10 points, give this shared first name of men \"of Chrysostom\", \"of Patmos\", and the author of the last of the four canonical Gospels.", "Saint John", "H"]
["In Biblical times, these figures could be subjected to sotah, or the ordeal of the bitter water. In the Gemara, the rules of kol isha prohibit these people from singing, since it is considered ervah to do so in public. The Talmud dictates that they are entitled to one ma'ah per week in addition to medical care and a proper burial. These people are required to perform onah unless they use an eid that indicates they are (*) niddah. To follow tzunit, these people often wear a sheitl, a wig covering their natural hair. This group of people usually do not study the Torah but is called to household duties unless they marry with large dowries. For 10 points, name this specific set of Jewish people that may include Rebekah, Rachel, and Hannah.", "Women in Judaism", "H"]
["In the 21st Surah, a bird reports to Jibril that one of these things is harming Ibrahim, who is actually wearing a magic ring from Allah that shields him from it. Orthodox Christians believe that a \"holy\" type of this thing appears over Jesus' tomb every Great Saturday at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. Zoroastrians distinguish between the dadga, adaran, and behram types of this thing that are used in temples of this name to (*) purify things along with water. In the Bible, ritually slaughtered animals were subjected to this on the Temple altar. In Exodus, God guides the Israelites as a pillar of clouds by day and a pillar of this thing by night. At Pentecost, the Holy Spirit formed on the apostles' heads as \"tongues\" of this thing. For 10 points, name this natural phenomenon that affected the burning bush.", "Fire", "H"]
["A statue previously located near this object had arrows thrown at it as an act of divination. The building containing this object was originally home to a series of \"dangling poems.\" It is located adjacent to a low semicircular wall, and a golden rainspout was added during a rebuilding of this object. This object was originally surrounded by a series of 360 idols, including a statue of Hubal. One corner of this object is lined up with the rising of the star Canopus, and another of its corners is the origin of a marble stripe. The act of Tawaf is done around this object, and involves circumambulating it seven times; that occurs during the Hajj. For 10 points, name this large black cube located in the Masjid al-Haram in Mecca, which sets the direction of prayer.", "Kaaba", "H"]
["The death of a self-flagellating follower of this man led crowds at a tomb to practice a \"release\" ritual, in which they violently beat a person undergoing convulsions. A \"respectful silence\" towards this man's followers was ended by the decree Vineam Domini.. This man wrote a three-volume book with sections discussing Pelagianism and original sin; that book espoused a namesake theologian's idea of irresistible grace. Five claims from that book by him, the Augustinus, were denounced by the papal bull Cum occasione. During the formulary controversy, this theologian was supported in a text attacking Jesuit casuistry, the Provincial Letters of Blaise Pascal. For 10 points, name this Dutch bishop who founded a namesake breakaway Catholic sect.", "Cornelius Jansen", "H"]
["Thomas Tweed called a group of this religion's practitioners the \"night stand\" followers, referring to their interaction with it primarily through secondary texts. Sinhalese members of this religion annually light a candle for Henry Steel Olcott, who wrote a catechism for it. Elizabeth Peabody translated scripture from this religion for the periodical The Dial. This religion was popular among members of the Theosophical Society, and Helena Blavatsky publicly accepted its Five Precepts with Olcott in Sri Lanka. Jack Kerouac was a fan of a Dwight Goddard, who wrote a \"bible\" for this religion and co-authored several books with another of its popularizers, D.T. Suzuki. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Siddhartha Gautama.", "Buddhism", "H"]
["It's not a bird, but a type of these real-life animals with long-arms and man-eating tendencies was known as the Xiao. One of these animals accidentally kills his brother by sealing up a cave, having mistaken the blood seeping out of it for his sibling's. Prior to their transformation into these animals, two gods placed their younger half-brothers on anthills and wore loincloths; post- transformation, those relatives of the Mayan Hero Twins become patrons of the arts. Another of these animals mistook the sun for a mango and once brought back a whole mountain because an herb grew on it. That son of Vayu extinguishes his flaming tail on the sea around Lanka. For 10 points, give this animal form of Rama's ally Hanuman.", "Monkey", "H"]
["Alexander III may be the source of a legend about one of these people named Andreas who became Pope. Edgardo Mortara was one of these people, who was controversially made a ward of the state. Until 1955, the intercession for them on Good Friday was the only intercession where the congregation did not kneel. That prayer asked God to \"remove the veil\" from these people's hearts. Nostra Aetate declared these people should not be \"presented as rejected or accursed by God.\" These people were deported during the Roman razzia. In the Gospel of John, these people demand the death of Jesus. Pius XII was accused of condoning their genocide during World War II. For 10 points, name these people that read the Torah.", "Jews", "H"]
["his man related how a king ordered that a sheep be sacrificed in place of an ox for the consecration of a bell. This man's mother, a prominent role model, once responded to his truancy by cutting a cloth she had been weaving. This man used the example of compassion, shame, reverence, and moral value felt toward a child falling down a well to illustrate the Four Beginnings. The last of the Four Books is a collection of conversations with this man, an extreme optimist with respect to human nature, who studied under Zi Si. This scholar of the fourth century BCE was often called the \"Second Sage.\" For 10 points, name this second greatest Confucian after Confucius himself.", "Mencius", "H"]
["This book describes the loss of the \"faithful martyr\" Antipas, said to have been killed in a city \"where Satan dwells.\" The author of this book chides a community for forsaking their first love, another for following an immoral prophetess, and still another for being lukewarm, warning that God will spit them out of His mouth. It begins with brief messages to seven churches in Asia, such as Ephesus and Philadelphia. In this book, creatures called locusts have human faces with lion's teeth. Near the end of this book, the author describes the \"Beast of the Earth\" and the \"Beast of the Sea,\" and the opening of the seventh seal. For 10 points, name this final book of the New Testament which contains numerous prophecies about the end of the world.", "Book of Revelation", "H"]
["The \"dede\" is the spiritual leader of a religion mostly based in this country. Jews were disproportionately targeted by the 1942 \"Wealth Tax\" in this country. The \"National Vision\" religious organization has a great deal of pull among the Islamic diaspora from this country. This modern-day country is the primary home of the Alevi sect, and it was also the country to which Baha'ullah was exiled. Bartholomew I heads a major religion in this country. Hospitals and other workplaces in this country forbid women from wearing headscarves. For 10 points, name this officially secular, majority Muslim country, whose capital contains the former Hagia Sophia.", "Turkey", "H"]
["The title character of this book is instructed to cover his lip and forgo the bread of mourners after his wife dies. Part of this book describes the uselessness of the wood of the vine among the trees of the forest. This book describes how a man eats a scroll, only to find that it tastes like honey. The tradition of merkabah mysticism grew out of an image in this book, of four creatures each bearing the faces of a man, a lion, an eagle, and an ox. Like Revelation, this book contains an apocalyptic passage describing the destruction of Gog and Magog. For 10 points, name this Old Testament prophetic book containing many visions, such as the valley of dry bones.", "Book of Ezekiel", "H"]
["This sect believes that all of its religion's sacred texts have gradually disappeared, such that existing anga are not authentic. This sect consistently depicts its holiest figures with downcast eyes, and believes that people who become kevalins no longer need food. This sect believes that Mallinath must not have been a woman, since women must be reborn as men to achieve enlightenment or become tirthankaras. Ascetics of this sect carry a water gourd and a peacock- feather broom to sweep insects away, and nothing else. For 10 points, name this smaller and more austere sect of Jainism whose monks are \"sky-clad,\" or naked, by contrast to the white robes of Svetambara monks.", "Digambar Jain Mahasabha", "H"]
["A group of nineteen of these creatures called the Zabaniah are responsible for torment, and a set of them called the \"Journeyers\" are tasked with seeking out assemblies. A pair of these creatures called the Kiramin Katibin are responsible for recording deeds, and the appearance of one of these creatures twice in a single year prompted the Farewell Sermon. These creatures are made of light, unlike jinns, who are made of smokeless fire. The first appearance of one of these creatures is celebrated on the Night of Power, and during that event he repeatedly said \"read!\" to a person who replied \"I can't read.\" For 10 points, name these creatures from Islamic mythology, including one which first appeared in a cave to Muhammad and dictated the Qu'ran, named Jibril.", "Angel", "H"]
["This man peeled poles of wood from almond trees and placed them next to a watering hole, after he tricked his father-in-law into giving him the striped and speckled animals from his flocks. Many Jewish services begin with a prayer praising this man's tents, Ma Tovu. This Biblical character renamed the site of Luz to Bethel, which was the place his mother died. While sleeping on a stone, this man dreamed of angels ascending to heaven. Though his birth name literally means \"heel\", he was given a new name meaning \"he who struggles with God\", or Israel. This man dressed up in goatskins to steal his brother's birthright. For 10 points, name this brother of Esau and son of Isaac.", "Jacob", "H"]
["This religion prohibited ritually killing personas-non-grata known as \"sacred men,\" a taboo explored in a philosophical study by Giorgio Agamben. A euphemistic term meaning \"the gods below\" is applied to the gods of death in this religion, who were worshiped outside the sacred boundary of this religion's center. The divination of the livers of sacrificed animals in this religion is termed haruspicy. Adherents of this religion worship household deities named lares (LAH-rayz). Masters switched roles with their slaves on a popular festival day from this religion, and it counted among its clergy an order of women who took a vow of chastity to tend a hearth's eternal fire. For 10 points, name this polytheistic religion whose practitioners worshiped Vesta and Jupiter.", "Rotunda (architecture)", "H"]
["This is the occupation held by a man who sends servants to the house of Simon the tanner in Joppa. A man in this position states \"I do not deserve to have you come under my roof\" and explains that he says \"Do this\" to his obedient servant. In Matthew 8, Jesus heals the servant of one of these men in Capernaum, saying there is no one in Israel with such great faith as that man. After seeing a vision of a sheet being lowered from Heaven containing \"unclean\" animals, Peter meets one of these men named Cornelius, which symbolically opens up the Gospel to the Gentiles. According to the Gospel of a Mark, a man in this position says \"Surely this man was the son of God!\" after seeing how Jesus died. For 10 points, name this occupation which is held by various Roman military men in the New Testament.", "Centurion", "H"]
["One text says that during this event, the main participant was offered milk and wine, and when he chose milk, he was told he had chosen the Fitrah. The text named for and detailing this event also states that the Children of Israel will work corruption in to the earth twice, and details how every person has their fate tied to their necks and will be forced to read from a scroll of their deeds on judgment day. This undertaking was done with the help of a steed with a woman's face, and during this event the number of required daily prayers was reduced from 50 to 5. All seven heavens, with accompanying prophets, were visited during this event, which ended at \"the Farthest Mosque\", which is identified with Al-Aqsa. For 10 points, name this event in which Muhammad rode a flying horse from Mecca to Jerusalem and back.", "Night Journey", "H"]
["According to an apocalyptic prophecy in the Book of Zechariah, God will stand on this place and split it in two. In the Old Testament, this location was known as Har HaMashchit because of the corruption and idol worship that took place there. This place lends its name to the last of the Five Discourses of Matthew, an apocalyptic narrative by Jesus. In real life, this place is the site of the oldest Jewish cemetery. The Latin term Flevit super ilam denotes Jesus's weeping at this place, where he later ascended to heaven. For 10 points, identify this elevated region from which Christ descended into Jerusalem, which was home to numerous groves of a namesake tree.", "Mount of Olives", "H"]
["The shortest of the Upanishads, the Mandukya, is almost entirely an explication of this practice. A transcendental silence sometimes termed turiya is produced as a result of this action. Apart from the swastika, the main symbol of Hinduism is the symbolic representation of this practice. The three main Vedas, as well as the three members of the Trimurti, are represented by the three sounds produced when this action is performed. Performing this action by itself results in the pranava mantra, which is held to be the source of all other mantras, though this action is more usually followed by the word \"shanti.\" For 10 points, name this production of a sacred syllable in Hinduism.", "Pancharama Kshetras", "H"]
["Pius VII greenlighted Gaspare del Bufalo's establishment of an order of missionaries named for this thing. Denizens of Bruges dress up in medieval garb to celebrate a relic of this entity, which was brought there during the Second Crusade. This thing is invoked twenty-four times, each time with the exhortation \"save us!,\" in a \"most precious\" litany. This is the second of two items mentioned in John 6:53-55 in connection with eternal life. In a literal sense, this substance was produced alongside the Holy Prepuce, and it resulted from the Five Holy Wounds. For 10 points, name this substance, which, according to the doctrine of transubstantiation, is what the wine in the Eucharist really becomes.", "Blood of Christ", "H"]
["On this holiday, Hans Castorp confesses his love to Claudia Chauchat in French after borrowing a pencil from her to use on a pig. The arrival of Galatea on a shell inspires the Homunculus to kill himself on this holiday. On this holiday, a character exclaims, \"Forgive me, but manuscripts don't burn\" before producing a supposedly-lost novel. On this holiday, Natasha arrives naked on the back of a pig in a novel in which a ball takes places in Berlioz's apartment. A mouse coming out of a dancer's mouth in an event on this holiday reminds the protagonist of a verse drama to think of Gretchen. For 10 points, name this holiday that occurs on April 30th, when witches' sabbaths occur in scenes from The Master and Margarita and Faust.", "Walpurgis Night", "H"]
["This modern-day country is home to a structure where people routinely made thirteen meter jumps so that their wishes would be granted. Forty years after the killing of the twenty-six martyrs of this country, its Christian community went underground as the \"hidden Christians\" lest they be forced to trample on images of Jesus or Mary. A large place of worship in this country is dismantled and rebuilt every twenty years, and is said to hold the Sacred Mirror, one of the three items in this country's regalia. This country is also home to lintel-topped vermillion gates known as torii. For 10 points, name this country whose inhabitants supposedly die Buddhist, but are born Shinto", "Japan", "M"]
["This leader did not fire Jean-Louis Tauran but did fire Tauran's colleagues due to a bank money laundering scandal. This leader has praised Walter Kasper, who refers to this man as a radical. This person celebrated his most recent birthday by having breakfast with three homeless men and their dog. During a 2013 press conference, this person asked \"Who am I to judge?\" in response to a question about homosexuality. He disagreed with N\u00e9stor Kirchner over government transparency, and he differs with Cristina Kirchner on abortion and gay marriage. Name this Argentinian, born Jorge Mario Bergoglio, who is now the pontiff of the Catholic Church.", "Pope Francis", "H"]
["A person with this status is obliged to fast on the Fourteenth of Nisan in Judaism. Another Jewish rite named for these people takes place 31 days after birth and requires that five shekels be given to a kohein for their sake; that ritual is the \"Redemption\" of a person with this status. (*) Reuben loses the rights of this status by sleeping with Rachel's maid, Bilhah. The Book of Genesis notes that Jacob gained his name by clutching at a rival's heel to try and gain this status. Jews with this status were protected from death by lamb's blood painted on their doors in Egypt. For 10 points, identify this status of the Egyptian children killed by the angel of death during the Tenth Plague.", "Firstborn (Judaism)", "H"]
["Joseph Meacham and Lucy Wright helped organize this faith after the death of an illiterate founder who claimed to be Jesus' second incarnation. It grew out of a religious sect led by Jane and James Wardley that took many of its rituals from the Camisards. This faith experienced a revival during the \"era of manifestations.\" This faith's communities at Watervliet, Hancock, and New Lebanon grew famous for manufacturing (*) simple furniture. Mother Ann Lee brought this faith to America, where its communities mostly died out by the early 20th-century thanks to its doctrine of celibacy. \"Simple Gifts\" is one of this faith's hymns. For 10 points, name this splinter sect from the Quakers that received its name because its adherents dance during worship.", "Shakers", "H"]
["Neylan McBaine leads a \"project\" named for these people. Since 1978, these people have been allowed to speak in general conference. These people comprise the entire membership of the Relief Society, which since 1977 has been considered on par with the Melchizedek priesthood. A protest for the ordination of these people in April 2014 aroused ire by refusing to leave (*) Temple Square. In December 2012, these people staged a \"wear pants to church\" protest. For 10 points, identify these people who are currently barred from most leadership positions in the Latter-Day Saint movement, and are instead expected to marry and bear children.", "Neylan McBaine", "H"]
["One of these beings from a non-fictional religion carries a staff with jingling rings and is called \"Lord of the Six Paths.\" Another of these individuals has thousands of arms behind him arranged like peacock feathers and received ten extra heads to redeem the wicked. The Chinese goddess Kannon derives from the most compassionate of these beings, (*) Avalokiteshvara (uh-VAH-low-kee-tesh-VAH-ruh). Although their self-sacrifice is celebrated in China and Japan, becoming one of these individuals is less admirable than becoming an arhat in Theravada tradition. For 10 points, name these idealized humans in Mahayana Buddhism who return to earth after achieving enlightenment.", "Bodhisattva", "H"]
["\"Positive\" and \"negative\" subsets of these things respectively correspond to the organs of the body and the days of the year. The eight threads and five knots of the tzitzit remind believers of the number of these things, which also corresponds to the numerical value of the word \"Torah.\" 26 of these things are only relevant in the land of (*) Israel. The Halakah developed to facilitate practical application of these things. Maimonides compiled the canonical list of 613 of these commandments, which include acknowledging God's existence and reading the Torah. For 10 points, give this term for a Hebrew law to which Jewish men become subject, or \"bar,\" at age 13.", "Mitzvah", "H"]
["In the 1990s, members of this religious movement fed refugees and victims in the Siege of Sarajevo and during the First Chechen War. This movement is responsible for the worldwide popularity of a ceremony in which people pull three-story chariots around streets. Members of this movement founded the nonprofit \"Food for Life\" initiative. This movement was founded in New York City by A. C. (*) Bhaktivedanta, and its most recognizable ritual is the recitation of a sixteen-word Maha Mantra incorporating Rama and its two namesake words. Another name for this movement, which focuses on its role spreading \"consciousness,\" is ISKCON. For 10 points, name this Western-friendly Hindu movement seeking to venerate an avatar of Vishnu.", "Hare Krishna", "H"]
["On a snowy day, one member of this group had chased a lion into a pit and killed it. A few members of this group went to procure a drink of water, but the recipient poured it out on the ground, asking \"Is it not the blood of men who went at the risk of their lives?\" The Bible places these men into divisions like the Three and the Thirty. Because a member of this group refused an order to go home and wash his feet, he was murdered by being placed in the (*) front lines, an act which prompted Nathan to admonish the giver of that order. Joab commanded this group, which included Bathsheba's husband Uriah the Hittite. For 10 points, name this group that fought for the killer of Goliath.", "Zeruiah", "H"]
["One segment of this book describes men \"who whet their tongues like swords, who aim bitter words like arrows.\" The opening stanza of another part of this book asks \"how long will you hide your face from me,\" amidst a refrain of \"how long?\" The ashrei prayer consists entirely of segments from this book. One part of this book, which consists of 22 stanzas, each beginning with a different (*) letter of the Hebrew alphabet, is the longest chapter of the Bible. Superscriptions appear above most parts of this book, which was paraphrased in Martin Luther's \"A Mighty Fortress is Our God.\" The words \"The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want\" open its twenty-third section. For 10 points, name this Old Testament book of lyrics, attributed to David.", "Psalms", "H"]
["In this country's celebration of Epiphany, worshipers venerate tabots, replicas of the Ark of the Covenant, before re-enacting Jesus' baptism. The first muezzin, Bilal, came from this site of the Timkat Festival. This country's Church of Our Lady of Zion purports to contain the original Ark of the Covenant. Frumentius converted this country's king (*) Ezana, who, according to the Kebra Nagast , was descended from Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. Christian missionaries converted this country's Axumite Kingdom. For 10 points, name this country once ruled by the Rastafarian Messiah Haile Selassie.", "Ethiopia", "H"]
["Matthew holds that an event in this city fulfilled a prophecy by Jeremiah beginning, \"A voice was heard in Ramah.\" In this city, a woman sat at the foot of a prospective husband's bed and \"uncovered his feet\" to try to seduce him. A woman of Moab moved to this city after promising, \"Where you go, I will go,\" and found a job in this city gleaning the fields of Boaz. (*) Naomi and Ruth return to this city in the Book of Ruth. A census taken by Caesar Augustus requiring residents of Syria to register in the towns of their ancestors forced a family to travel to this birthplace of King David. For 10 points, name this site of the massacre of the innocents, the adoration of the magi, and the birth of Jesus.", "Bethlehem", "H"]
["The person performing this action is mandated to give three gifts to a kohen for nothing in return. The Sura al-Maida, or The Table, begins by specifying that the name of Allah must be invoked by the person carrying out this action. The glatt status must be maintained prior to this action, which is accomplished using the halluf. Dhabiha and (*) shechita denote the proper method of performing this action, which in Islam can be done by any Person of the Book. In Judaism, it is followed by the removal of the sciatic nerve, and in Islam, it is accomplished by the slicing of both carotids and jugulars. For 10 points, name this first ritual on the road to produce halal or kosher meat.", "Ritual slaughter", "H"]
["Asanga and Vasubandhu founded a school of Mahayana Buddhism named for this term that rivaled Nagarjuna's Madhyamika school. This term identifies 196 sutras written by Patanjali. Its \"hatha\" form is based on a collection of asana. One form of it is the intense love for a single god that characterizes (*) Shaivism and Vaishnavism; another is named for \"perfect knowledge.\" This discipline, with karma, jnana, and bhakti forms, is best-known as practiced with breath control and the \"sun salutation.\" For 10 points, name this collection of disciplines from India whose most famous application is in therapeutic stretching.", "Yoga", "H"]
["A commemorative arch is a prominent feature of a building of this kind nicknamed the \"Ruin,\" or \"Hurva.\" The oldest active surviving example of these buildings dates to the 13th century in Prague; in the attic of that \"old new\" one, a guardian is said to lie in pieces. Women were segregated from men in an upstairs gallery of these buildings known as the \"courtyard.\" Larger ones often employ a cantor, or (*) hazzan. These buildings contain a curtained closet named the hekhal and a bimah elevated by two or three steps. The Holy of Holies is the model for the ark that holds the scrolls of the Torah in these buildings. For 10 points, name these buildings which include lecterns for rabbis and serve as Jewish houses of worship.", "Synagogue", "H"]
["According to legend, Saint Columba performed this non-verbal action to make the Loch Ness monster disappear. John Wesley mysteriously made performing this action after infant baptism both mandatory and optional in his revision of the Book of Common Prayer, though it is uncommon in Methodist practice. Orthodox Christians hold their (*) thumb, index finger, and middle finger together while performing this action from right to left. This practice is performed alongside the Trinitarian formula, the saying of \"in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.\" For 10 points, name this blessing in which one traces the object Christ was crucified upon.", "Sign of the cross", "H"]
["This man is the presumed author of a canonical epistle that quotes the noncanonical Book of Enoch and refers to a fight between Satan and Michael over Moses' body. In the Gospel of John, this disciple asks Christ why he doesn't manifest himself to the whole world at the Last Supper. Along with Bartholomew, this saint first spread the Gospel to Armenia. The penultimate book of the New Testament is this saint's (*) epistle. Mentions of this apostle, who is often equated with Thaddeus, are typically appended with \"of James\" so as to distinguish this saint from an apostle with a similar name. For 10 points, name this patron saint of lost causes, the namesake of a children's hospital.", "Jude the Apostle", "H"]
["The founder of this religion traced the contest between God and Satan in the five-volume Conflict of the Ages. This religion teaches of a \"heavenly sanctuary\" where Jesus carries out an \"investigative judgment\" of the living and dead. This denomination holds that departed souls are held in an unconscious sleep until the Day of (*) Judgment, when the evil souls are annihilated rather than damned. Ellen G. White founded this sect, preaching that the Catholic Church was the whore of Babylon and the Pope was the Antichrist. It grew out of Millerites disappointed that the world had not ended on October 22, 1844. For 10 points, name this Christian denomination named for the fact that it practices the Sabbath on Saturday.", "Seventh-day Adventist Church", "H"]
["This text compares men who take non-divine patrons to spiders, who build the weakest homes of any animal. Another passage from this text compares divine light to \"a niche and within it a lamp; the lamp enclosed in Glass: the glass as it were a brilliant star.\" Its brief first section, containing a request to \"guide us on the right path,\" is called \"The (*) Opening.\" In another section of this long text, part of a yellow animal is used to bring a man back to life to accuse his murderer; that section, containing the \"throne verse,\" is called \"the Cow.\" This book consists of ayat that form surahs. For 10 points, name this most sacred text of Islam.", "Quran", "H"]
["A prayer service called the Three Hours sometimes takes place from noon to three o'clock on this holiday. The service on this holiday includes the singing of the Improperia, or \"Reproaches.\" The nursery rhyme \"Hot Cross Buns\" is named for an English food eaten on this holiday, whose services include a controversial prayer that the Jews \"acknowledge that Jesus Christ is the savior.\" This first day of Triduum is the most notable holiday on which worshipers meditate on the encounters with (*) Simon of Cyrene and Saint Veronica as part of the fourteen-part devotion to the Stations of the Cross. For 10 points, name this Catholic holy day which recalls the day of Jesus' crucifixion and takes place two days before Easter.", "Good Friday", "H"]
["This area is identified with the threshing floor bought from Araunah for fifty pieces of silver to relieve a plague. Solomon's Stables can be found to the southeast of this place. A building in this place contains the Well of Souls within its Foundation Stone. By visiting this walled-in trapezoidal area, Ariel (*) Sharon provoked the Second Intifada. In Jewish tradition, it is identified with Moriah, where Abraham bound Isaac; Muslims venerate it because it contains the al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock. For 10 points, name this elevated site in Jerusalem thought to have once been the site of the Holy of Holies.", "Committee for the Prevention of Destruction of Antiquities on the Temple Mount", "H"]
["This religion's doctrine of \"not-one-pointedness\" holds that factual propositions should be turned into one of seven kinds of conditionals prefaced by the adverb syad. This religion's major symbol consists of a swastika above an open palm containing a chakra wheel. Monks in this religion take the \"five great vows\" in order to attain right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct, its non-Buddhist (*) Three Jewels. Disagreements over the authority of the agama, and whether women could ever attain moksha, led to the split between its Digambara and Svetambara sects. For 10 points, name this Indian religion founded by Mahavira on the non-violent principle of ahimsa.", "Jainism", "H"]
["The last of these people to appear contradicts his elders because \"Great men are not always wise; neither do the aged understand judgment.\" The first of these people to speak is a Temanite who relates that \"fear and trembling\" came upon him after a spirit spoke. Their arguments earn the angry rejoinder, \"I know that my Redeemer lives.\" A divine voice from a (*) whirlwind interrupts the last of these people to speak, Elihu. The other three of these people, Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, sit in mourning for seven days with a man who has just lost his wife, children, and livestock. For 10 points, identify this group of people who reproach a much-suffering companion in his namesake Old Testament book.", "Bildad", "H"]
["H.H. Wilson created the first English version of a poem in this language in which an exiled nature spirit convinces the title character to carry a message to his wife in a city ruled by a god of wealth. The protagonist of a play written in this language finds a signet ring in the belly of a fish, allowing him to break a curse and recognize his wife. A seven-book poem in this language is titled for a character whose (*) sandals are placed on his throne during his exile. In that epic in this language, the protagonist overthrows the reigning monkey king and builds an army to rescue his abducted wife Sita from the demon Ravana. For 10 points, name this primary liturgical language of Hinduism, used to write the works of Kalidasa and the Ramayana.", "Sanskrit", "H"]
["A man who plants a sapling while hearing about this event is advised to go on planting that sapling. It is followed by the Olam Ha-Ba. This event is the subject of the Ani Ma'amin, a setting of the twelfth of the thirteen principles in the Yigdal. A widespread belief that this had occurred was shattered when the leader of the Sabbateans converted to Islam. (*) Elijah announces this event, which will entail the rebuilding of the temple and the gathering of the exiles to Israel by a descendant of David. For 10 points, identify this apocalyptic occurrence in Jewish belief, which involves God's anointed coming to rule over the Hebrews.", "Testament of Adam", "H"]
["This concept is the namesake of a monk whose eighteenth vow promised that anyone who called on his name ten times would be reborn in the Pure Land. This term, which names the monk who became Amitabha Buddha, is embodied as Yudhisthira's father in the Mahabharata. Along with the sangha and the Buddha, it is one of the Three Jewels. It is often represented as a namesake (*) \"chakra,\" a wheel whose eight spokes represent the eightfold path. This term can be roughly translated as \"right way of living.\" For 10 points, name this cosmic principle of duty, which is, like karma, central to many Indian religions.", "Dharma", "H"]
["A bell tower named for this man collapsed in 1902. This man's body was wrapped in pork to hide it from Muslim custom agents when it was smuggled out of Alexandria in the 11th century to a new city, where he superseded St. Theodore. According to Acts, a conflict over whether to forgive this man caused a split between Paul and Barnabas. This man's namesake book is the only one to relate the Parable of the (*) Growing Seed and was the first Gospel to be written. This man's symbol, the lion, was adopted for a city that built a basilica for him on the Grand Canal. For 10 points, name this patron saint of Venice and author of the second book of the New Testament.", "Mark the Evangelist", "H"]
["Andre Godard refurbished a mausoleum in this country that serves as a pilgrimage site along with the nearby Musalla Gardens. The haft-sinn table stays up for thirteen days after its new year, which entails jumping over bonfires. The eighteen \"letters of the living\" followed a religious leader from this country who claimed to be John the Baptist reincarnated and called himself \"the (*) Gate.\" This country's new year's celebration is called Nowruz. This country's government executed the Bab, whose follower Baha'ullah went on to found the Baha'i faith. For 10 points, name this country whose Supreme Leader is the Shiite cleric Ali Khamenei.", "Iran", "H"]
["Orunmila is credited with developing one version of this practice that involves hundreds of odu. The Ten Wings are a group of commentaries on this practice. Information about this practice in Roman times comes from a bronze artefact named for Piacenza. This practice is performed with palm nuts called ikin by a (*) babalawo in a Santeria ritual for performing this task called If\u00e1. Yarrow stalks were used to perform this action along with a book detailing sixty-four hexagrams. For 10 points, identify this task performed in traditional Chinese religion with the help of the I Ching or oracle bones.", "Divination", "H"]
["When Jesus heals ten lepers in the Gospel of Luke, one of these people is the only one to return and praise God. In the Gospel of John, another of these people says she has no husband, then receives the reply that she has had five husbands and is currently living in sin. Known as \"Kuthim,\" these people built a temple on the site where they believe Abraham tried to sacrifice Isaac, Mount (*) Gerizim. In John, Jesus encounters the \"woman at the well,\" who belongs to this group. A parable about one of these people is set on the road from Jerusalem to Jericho, where a priest and a Levite ignore an injured man whom one of these people assists. For 10 points, name this Semitic religious group depicted in a famous parable about being a good neighbor.", "Samaritans", "H"]
["This book quotes Proverbs to claim that by helping your enemy, you will \"heap coals of fire on his head\" in a passage that warns \"vengeance is mine..saith the Lord.\" This book compares its addressees to branches grafted onto an olive tree where other, bad branches had been cut away. This letter uses God's promise to Rebecca that the \"elder will serve the younger\" as an analogy for how the \"children of the promise\" have replaced \"Abraham's seed.\" The quote \"If (*) God is for us, who can be against us?\" originates from this book, which inspired Martin Luther's sola fide doctrine. This letter asserts that \"the righteous shall live by faith\", but famously warns that \"the wages of sin is death\". For 10 points, name this longest epistle written by Saint Paul, which is addressed to an imperial city.", "Epistle to the Romans", "H"]
["Soon after one of these events occurs, the keriah is performed. A meal of eggs and bread, the seudat havara'ah, follows these events, which are immediately succeeded by the aninut period, as well as the shloshim and avelut. In response to these events, worshippers spend seven days \"sitting shiva.\" The yahrzeit candle is lit on the anniversary of one of these events. The (*) tallit of a person who undergoes one of them has one of its fringes cut off. For thirty days after one of these events, a prayer beginning \"May his great name grow exalted and sanctified,\" the kaddish, is recited to the congregation. For 10 points, name these occurrences in Judaism that are typically followed by a burial and funeral.", "Bereavement in Judaism", "H"]
["In one of these texts, a beggar asks to eat some food consecrated to the breath of life because the breath of life flows through him, too. Max Mueller created an important translation of these texts for his advisor, Friedrich Schelling. In another passage from these texts, Svetaketu learns a lesson by dropping a lump of salt into water and drinking the water the next morning. They contain the four \"great sayings,\" including (*) \"Brahman is Prajna\" and \"Thou art that.\" There are 108 of these texts, but ten \"principal\" ones, including the \"prashna\" and \"Chandogya.\" Arthur Schopenhauer's reading of these texts helped inspire The World as Will and Representation. For 10 points, name this set of commentaries on the Vedas.", "Upanishads", "H"]
["This man instituted the \"prosbul\" procedure to allow the wealthy to lend money safely. \"Light and heavy\" and \"equivalence of expressions\" are two of the group of arguments he labeled legitimate lines of interpretation. The question \"If not now, when?\" epitomizes this man's compassion, which led him to debate his stricter rival, (*) Shammai. This man established his namesake \"seven rules\" for interpreting Scripture. While standing on one foot, this man once told a Gentile that the statement \"That which is hateful to you, do not do to your fellow\" summarized the entire Torah. For 10 points, name this first century Rabbi in whose memory Jews eat a matzah sandwich on Passover.", "Hillel the Elder", "H"]
["In a vision, the path to this object is bordered by a rod of iron, and a building full of sinners jeers at those walking the path. The prophet Lehi has a vision of this object in the Book of Mormon. At the end of Revelation, this object appears on either bank of a crystal-clear river. In Jewish mysticism, the diagram of the ten (*) Sefirot is given the name of this object. It is debatable whether one example of this object was the same as its counterpart, which granted knowledge of good and evil, and whether its environment's two inhabitants ate its fruit. For 10 points, name this tree, which, in Christian tradition, stood in the Garden of Eden.", "Tree of life", "H"]
["This religion sorts all living things into five tiers, according to how many senses they possess. Its name is derived from a word meaning \"to conquer\", as its main focus is self-control. Followers of this religion are only allowed to commit suicide through fasting, a process known as sallekhana. It's not Hinduism, but the ultimate goal of followers of this religion is emancipation from reincarnation, or (*) moksha. This religion follows the teachings of twenty-four enlightened figures, of which two are historically attested \u0096 these are the \"ford-makers\", or tirthankara. For 10 points, name this Indian minority religion, whose followers practise ahimsa, or nonviolence.", "Jainism", "H"]
["Instead of weapons, Brahma carries a group of these items called his \"eyes.\" In Greek Orthodoxy, these objects appear on komboskini. In Tibetan Buddhism, the most important of these items is called the \"guru\" one. In Hinduism, these objects are called japa mala. A form of dhikr that makes use of these items is called (*) tasbih; that one, used in Islam, is the misbaha. The most famous set of these items is used to contemplate the \"joyful,\" \"sorrowful,\" \"glorious,\" and \"luminous\" mysteries. In that ritual, these items are used to pray fifteen decades. For 10 points, name these ritual items that Catholics use to count the rosary.", "Prayer beads", "H"]
["The third part of this book describes the battle of Edrei, in which King Og is killed. Practices condemned in this book include the setting up of ritual pillars and self-mutilation in mourning, but it encourages the sacrifice of first-born male livestock. This book concludes with the death of its central character atop (*) Mount Nebo. Notable verses from this book include the central credo of Judaism, the Shema. It depicts the second appearance of the Ten Commandments and the death of Moses. For 10 points, name this fifth book of the Bible, which is named after the \"second law.\"", "Book of Deuteronomy", "H"]
["In Greek Orthodoxy, this biblical character is credited with writing the Axion Estin hymn. Mormons believe that Noah is identical to this biblical character. In an early appearance, he claims to have been restrained for 21 days by the Prince of Persia. In Islam, his hadith contains the most explicit summary of the Five Pillars. In the Gospel of Luke, this character turns (*) Zacharias mute for saying that his wife Elizabeth is infertile. This character calls another \"blessed...among women\" before predicting the birth of a descendant of David. For 10 points, name this archangel who announced the birth of Christ and will blow his horn at the end of the world.", "Gabriel", "H"]
["Some of this religion's followers went on one of the earliest-known gluten-free diets to kill their \"three corpses.\" A popular image shows this religion's founder smiling at the taste of vinegar that two other men dislike. A group of symbols important to this religion are sets of three horizontal lines distinguished by which lines are (*) broken or unbroken. This religion uses the \"uncarved block\" as a metaphor for undeveloped human nature. This religion of the Celestial Masters is symbolized by the Eight Trigrams and epitomized by the \"butterfly dream\" of one of its leaders. For 10 points, name this religion that values the concepts of te and wu wei, a Chinese belief system established by Lao Zi.", "Taoism", "H"]
["In Jainism, this concept is seen as something exclusively negative, often referred to as \"dirt\", or pudgala. A different religion distinguishes between three types of this concept, explained with reference to three different styles of archery. In many traditions, the lotus flower is symbolic of this concept, as it bears seeds even as it blooms. (*) Bhisma explains this concept in the thirteenth book of the Mahabharata, saying \"If one's action bore no fruit, then everything would be of no avail.\" Many traditions link this concept with that of rebirth, as it is through it that people are affected by their past lives. For 10 points, name this force in Indian religions, through which an individual's actions affect their future.", "Karma", "H"]
["This religion's hell contains a tree that grows bitter fruit in the shape of monstrous heads. According to this religion, souls reach heaven by crossing a non-Chinvat bridge that cuts them in proportion to their sins. Between death and resurrection, souls in this religion reside in an antechamber called \"limit\" or \"barrier\" where they are questioned by two angels. This religion's seven-tiered heaven, the (*) \"garden,\" was visited on the miraj. After this religion's Day of Judgment, souls will go to a fiery hell, Jahannam, or the houri-filled paradise, Jannah. For 10 points, name this religion that supposedly promises believers seventy-two virgins in heaven.", "Islam", "H"]
["In one hadith, this figure is said to have not laughed since the fire was created, while in another context this figure gives Solomon the ring that he uses to control demons. Jehovah's witnesses and Seventh-Day Adventists believe this person is the same as Jesus. This figure intervenes in a 21 day battle between one of his allies and the Prince of Persia. This figure would often argue with (*) Samael as the defender of Israel, and in the Catholic tradition he is often depicted holding scales, which he uses to weigh the souls of the dead. This patron of the first chivalric order in France and the fascist Iron Guard in Romania is given the title \"Archistrategos\" or \"Supreme Commander of the Heavenly Host\" in Eastern Orthodoxy. For 10 points, name this Archangel that commands the armies of heaven in the Book of Revelation.", "Michael", "H"]
["It's not by Henry James, but imagery in this book includes a \"golden bowl\" breaking as a silver cord snaps. This book notes that even though all rivers run into the sea, the sea never rises any higher because of it. This book's last two verses tells us to \"Fear God, and keep his commandments\u0085 for God shall bring every work into judgment.\" The Hebrew name of this book is a feminine title or name meaning \"gatherer,\" though its speaker is also identified as (*) \"son of David\" and \"king in Jerusalem.\" In the original, this book often uses the word hevel, such as in its opening line, \"vanity of vanities, all is vanity.\" For 10 points, name this Old Testament book narrated by Qoheleth, which follows Proverbs and includes aphorisms like \"to everything there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven.\"", "Ecclesiastes", "H"]
["Instead of abandoning the use of the targumim during this practice, Yemeni Jews added a third targum to be used during it. This is the holiest activity divided up by instances of sof pasuk (pah-SOOHK). This practice is typically followed by a golel being called up, and/or by witnesses raising their pinky fingers. It doesn't involve immigration, but people who bless this activity, of whom the first in a given (*) day must traditionally be a kohen, do so in a process called aliyah on the bimah. The 54-part annual cycle of parshiyot governing this practice is concluded a week after Sukkot on a namesake joyous Simcha. For 10 points, identify this activity done for the first time by a thirteen-year-old boy at his bar mitzvah while looking at a scroll with the Pentateuch on it.", "Torah reading", "H"]
["After a prayer, a man appears in one of these buildings prostrating in mud and water while raindrops are leaking through that building's roof of date palm leaves. A religious ritual conducted between two hills found within one of these buildings commemorates a woman who ran between those hills seven times before a well sprang forth. If a location does not meet the requirements to be one of these places, it is called a musalla. A notable one of these buildings is named for its (*) blue tiles. One of these buildings named for Babur was destroyed in religious riots in 1992. Semicircular niches in the walls of these buildings indicate the direction in which one should perform prayers, which are typically held here on Fridays. For 10 points, name these holy buildings that are frequently adorned with minarets", "Mosque", "H"]
["In 1 Kings 13, one of these creatures stands by the corpse of a nameless \"disobedient prophet\" to show God's displeasure during the reign of Jeroboam. According to the Gnostic text Pistis Sophia, the head of one is found on the archon Yaldabaoth, sometimes identified as the Demiurge. In the valley of Timnah, several bees nested in the corpse of one of these creatures, where they made edible honey, as told in the book of Judges. This animal is often shown under images of the 24th tirthankar meditating, as it (*) symbolizes the Jain leader Mahavira. Saint Jerome removed a thorn from one of these creatures, and a winged one is the evangelical symbol of Saint Mark. Samson strangled one of these creatures, whose role as symbol for the tribe of Judah has led to its use by Rastafarians. For 10 points, name these carnivores which refused to harm the prophet Daniel after he was thrown in their den.", "Lion", "H"]
["A sura named for this event describes man's creation as a discharge of semen and asks whether he assumes that his bones cannot be assembled. An individual is held in barzakh until the occurrence of this event, which the third verse of sura al-Fatihah calls God the Lord of. In the lead-up to this event, questioning by two figures called Munkar and Nakir takes place. A man of reddish complex in saffron garments descends on a white minaret in eastern Damascus during this event, whose beginning is signalled by (*) Israfil. The Dajjal's predominance is brought to an end when Isa stabs him with a spear during this event, which marks the final separation of souls into Jannah and Jahannam. For 10 points, name this event during which the Mahdi appears, an occurrence that marks the end of time in Islam.", "Last Judgment", "H"]
["One of these works states that \"form is void and void is form\" and mentions a figure who perceives five different attributes of a personality to be empty. Many of these works begin by stating \"Thus I have heard.\" One of these works comments on impermanence by comparing all existence to a drop of dew. Another of these texts illustrates \"skillful means\" through a parable in which an old man tells his children that some carts they always wanted are lying outside in order to get them to leave a house that is (*) burning down. Several of these texts were translated by Xuanzang after he underwent a journey to the west in order to locate them, and one of them belonging to the Perfection of Wisdom genre discusses the enlightenment of Avalokitesvara. For 10 points, name these Buddhist texts that include the Diamond, Heart, and Lotus examples.", "Buddhist texts", "H"]
["According to Vasari, a depiction of this scene was deemed \"most dishonest\" because it had \"so many nude figures dishonestly showing their shame\" by Biagio da Cesena. Fra Angelico's depiction of this scene shows two blue-clad angels pointing down towards a white walkway where the lid of an open sarcophagus is broken. Daniele da Volterra was commissioned to paint braghe over (*) genitals in a different version of this scene, in which a depiction of St. Bartholomew holding a knife and his own flayed skin is believed to be a self-portrait. In that depiction of this scene, a pink-clad Madonna looks away away from Christ, who raises his hand against men to his right who beg for mercy. For 10 points, name this scene depicted by Michelangelo on the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel, which shows the souls of humans being sent to their fates.", "Last Judgment", "H"]
["This country is the home to a religion symbolized by the Seven Circles called the Subud movement. This country's \"illuminationism\" portrays reality as an aesthetic hierarchy according to a book which contrasts this country's impure form of one religion with that of a country represented by al-Yousi. Confucianism is the smallest of six recognized religions this government requires its citizens to register as members of. The hidden foot of a temple in this country contains 160 panels showing the laws of (*) karma; that temple contains five terraces that represent the Form World. Clifford Geertz contrasted the beliefs of Moroccans with those of this country's people in Islam Observed. This country contains the largest Buddhist temple in the world at Borobudur. For 10 points, name this country with the largest Muslim population in the world.", "Indonesia", "H"]
["In one story about this holiday, Rabbi Levi Yitzchak of Berditchev cried after a shoe mender asked him if he needed anything mended before this holiday came. This holiday occurs shortly before the Fast of Gedalia. One ritual done during or just after this holiday involves going to a body of water and shaking out one's pockets to symbolize casting off sins; that ritual is called the (*) Tashlich. Elul is a time period immediately preceding this holiday. On this holiday, apples dipped in honey are eaten. For 10 points, name this first of the High Holy Days, which begins on the first day of Tishrei ten days before Yom Kippur, and commemorates the Jewish new year.", "In one story about this holiday, Rabbi Levi Yitzchak of Berditchev cried after a shoe mender asked him if he needed anything mended before this holiday came. This holiday occurs shortly before the Fast of Gedalia. One ritual done during", "H"]
["The first of these items was allegedly received by king Abgar V of Edessa, which is considered a miraculous example of them that came into existence \"without hand.\" Our Lady of the Way is a type of these items, which are exemplified by one called Blachernitissa. \"Red corners\" are places in the home for the placement of these items, a wall of which separates the nave from the sanctuary and contains the (*) Royal Doors. The Cretan school and Stroganoff school were styles of producing these items, which were destroyed en masse during the reign of Leo the Isaurian. These items are typically flat panels depicting motifs such as theotokos and her son, Jesus. For 10 points, name these religious works of art venerated in Eastern Christian traditions.", "Icon", "M"]
["In one version of this event, women take men's scarves and put sugar in them, tying them to trees. In other variants, depictions of gods are swung around and accompanied by singing. Offerings are made to the love god Kamadeva on this holiday. One ritual performed during this day involves women drinking thangai or bhang and then hitting shielded men with lathis. This holiday celebrates the survival of King Hiranyakashipu's son, Prahlada, on a burning pyre. This event takes place on Phalguna Purnima, the vernal equinox. For 10 points, name this Hindu spring festival that involves throwing brightly colored powder.", "Holi", "M"]
["Polycrates of Ephesus and other Quartodecimans argued that this holiday should be celebrated on Nisan 14 of the Hebrew calendar, and its date was further debated at the first Council of Nicaea. In the Philippines, observers of this holiday re-enact the meeting of this festival's central figure with his mother, a ritual called Salubong. It is traditionally the time to baptize new converts to Christianity, and the Exsultet is sung on this feast day. It was formerly called Pascha, and is closely linked to the Jewish festival Pesach, or Passover. The week before this holiday is called Holy Week, and its season ends on Pentecost. For 10 points, name this holiday celebrating Jesus' resurrection.", "Easter", "M"]
["One culture sees this ritual as liberating the istli and uniting it with the Sun. A Hialeah, Florida law effectively prohibiting this type of rite was struck down in 1993, permitting Santeria to be practiced there. As the fire god and the messenger god, Agni received these. Maimonides and Nachmanides disagreed about whether these were necessary in Judaism, with Maimonides arguing that it was performed to fit in with local tribes. Two kinds of this action in Ancient Greece were the Hecatomb, which used 100 bulls, and the Holocaust, which is completely burned. For 10 points, name this ritual, called libation for liquids, which offers animals or materials to please a god.", "Sacrifice", "M"]
["One text in this religion was described as \"a treasure of divine mysteries\" and contains a series of short phrases in Arabic and Persian meant to be read daily. That book, Hidden Words, was translated by a man who implemented a Ten-Year Plan between 1953 and 1963. Followers of this religion follow a calendar with 19 months of 19 days, and observe a 19-day fast at the end of their year. One of its main texts is the Kit\u00e1b-i-\u00cdq\u00e1n (\"keh-tab-eh-ee-con\"), or Book of Certitude. It was formerly headed by guardian Shoghi Effendi and holds that figures like Jesus and the Buddha are Manifestations of God. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["One symbol of this holiday originates from a Jose Guadalupe Poseda etching of a \"dapper\" or \"elegant\" woman wearing only an ostentatious European hat. For this holiday, copal incense, atole, and the four elements symbolized by water, candles, tissue paper cutouts, and sweet buns with dough bones, are placed on ofrendas. Its decorations include calacas, such as Catrina with marigolds, and calaveras, or sugar skulls. Its first day is dedicated to angelitos, and its second day to adults. Syncretizing Catholic and Aztec beliefs, it coincides with All Hallows' Eve, All Saints' Day, and All Souls' Day. For 10 points, give this Mexican festival that celebrates the return of departed loved ones.", "Day of the Dead", "M"]
["The process of ritual possession is called \"mounting\" in this religion. The sky god in this religion, Damballah, is a member of the Rada family. Newcomers in this religion may be initiated with kanzo rites. Its temples, called hounfours, house priests that may be called either houngans or mambos, depending on their gender. Practitioners believe in a supreme god called Bondye, with whom they can communicate through loas such as Papa Legba and Baron Samedi. For 10 points, name this syncretic religion that is most commonly practiced in Haiti, often associated with zombies and its namesake dolls.", "Voodoo", "M"]
["This action occurred at tumuli, and in some Paleolithic civilizations, people were painted with red ochre before its occurrence. Mingqi often accompany this action that occurred in barrows. The opening of the mouth preceded it in Ancient Egypt, and in Judaism, stones are placed on its markers one year after this event. In Ancient Greece, a coin was placed under the tongue before this action as payment to Charon. In Judaism, it cannot occur in metal-containing vessels, and in Egypt the containers were frequently adorned with a mask. Germanic peoples used a burning boat to perform this action often occurring after funerals. For 10 points, name this ritual interment of the dead.", "Burial", "M"]
["The Persian version of this ritual involves an elaborate sofreh, or floor spread, and the Shinto version involves three sips of sake. Seven steps are taken around a fire in the Hindu version of this ritual. In China, its traditions include combing hair four times, eating tangyuan, and being carried on a red sedan. Mitzvah tantz is performed during the Jewish celebration of this event, which involves a ketubah. That event takes place under a chuppah symbolizing the building of a hospitable home under God, and is concluded with the breaking of glass. For 10 points, name this ceremony during which a veil traditionally hides the face of the bride.", "Wedding", "M"]
["One tale from this religion describes a pair of goat herders who both lose a goat, though one is a gambler and the other is studious. The central text of this religion begins with the line \"the name that can be named is not the eternal name\". In this religion, a former administrator of heaven, Yuanshi Tianzun, is a member of the Three Pure Ones. This religion values the virtues of jing, qi, and shen, known collectively as the Three Treasures or Three Jewels. This religion reveres Immortal Woman He, who is the only woman among its Eight Immortals. It prizes natural action or wu wei. For 10 points, name this religion meaning \"The Way,\" based around a work by Lao Tzu.", "Taoism", "M"]
["Josephus described this man's death as occurring at Macherus. This man's famous acts were said to happen at either \u00c6non or Bethabara. When the father of this figure disbelieved his infertile wife was to conceive, the father was left mute by the angel Gabriel. This man is described in the gospels of Mark and Matthew as a \"voice crying out in the wilderness\". This man was killed by the request of Salome at the urging of Salome's mother, who held a grudge against him. For 10 points, name this man who ritually bathed Jesus Christ.", "John the Baptist", "M"]
["A doomsday prophecy in this faith states that a comet named Gochihr will strike the Earth, creating a river of metal that purifies the wicked. Weddings in this religion include trays with pomegranates and sugar cones on them. Two four-eyed dogs guard the Chinvat bridge in this faith, which all souls cross after death. In this religion, the dead are placed on Dakhmas, or Towers of Silence. Its demons are called daevas, and its main text is the Avesta. For 10 points, name this Persian dualistic religion that focuses on the conflict between the evil force Ahriman and the benevolent force Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["Cheese is eaten on this holiday to commemorate the beheading of Holofernes, the leader of the Assyrians, by Judith. During this holiday, Al ha-Nissim are added to the hoda'ah section of the Amidah, and the last day of it is called Zot. Observers of this holiday sing songs like \"M'Ymaleil?\" (\"me-uh-ma-layl\") and \"Ma'oz Tzur.\" The letters Shin, Nun, Gimel, and Hey are inscribed on a top used in a traditional game for this holiday. This holiday celebrates a successful revolt against Antiochus, as well as the miraculous burning of an oil lamp for eight days. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday celebrated with a menorah.", "Hanukkah", "M"]
["This work features two sackcloth-girded individuals whose enemies are killed with fire and who live for only 260 days. Those men are referred to as both candlesticks and olive trees. It also features 24 elders prostrating themselves before a figure whose mouth was said to contain a sword. This work describes a creature with 7 heads and 10 horns, which places its mark of \"666\" on people. Four figures appear in this work, representing Victory, War, Famine, and Death, collectively known as the four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. For 10 points, name this final book of the New Testament.", "Book of Revelation", "M"]
["Trash is not thrown out until the fifth day of this festival. Prior to this festival, an effigy of the Kitchen God is smeared with honey and torched, and an inverted fu and couplets are hung beside doors. A legend associated with this festival warns of a child-eating monster that is scared by loud noises and a specific color. Lantern Festival marks the end of this festival that begins with a family reunion dinner of glutinous cake and dumplings. Associated with lion dances, firecrackers, and red envelopes, for 10 points, name this fifteen-day festival, the first in an Asian lunar calendar.", "Chinese New Year", "H"]
["A feast for this concept was instituted by Pius XI's encyclical Quam Primas. The tenth of the sephirot, malkuth, is the Old Testament term for this concept, which existence is celebrated on the Sunday before the First Sunday of Advent. Because his servants are not fighting against his being handing over, Jesus claims before Pilate that this concept is (*) \"not of this world.\" When the Pharisees ask about this concept, Jesus says it is not coming to be observed but already \"is within you.\" John the Baptist urged people to \"do penance\" because he claimed that this concept \"is at hand.\" Matthew prefers to describe this place as \"of Heaven\" instead of the otherwise common \"of God.\" This place's keys are given by Jesus to St. Peter. For 10 points, name this Christian theological location, where God exercises his monarchical power.", "Kingship and kingdom of God", "H"]
["A prophecy concerning this figure likened him to a \"lion's whelp\" and stated, \"His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk.\" He is known rather infamously for accidentally sleeping with his sister-in-law Tamar, who had disguised herself as a prostitute after her first two husbands died. This fourth son of Leah masterminded the plot to sell his brother (*) Joseph to a band of Ishmaelites headed towards Egypt, though he later offered his life in return for that of his younger brother Benjamin, who was accused of stealing a silver cup. This figure was the founder of one of the twelve tribes of Israel, and every king of Israel except Saul was a descendent of this man. For 10 points, name this Old Testament biblical figure, the son of Jacob from whom Jesus drew his genealogy and the namesake of an ancient Jewish state that lay south of the Kingdom of Israel.", "Judah", "H"]
["One sect of this religion derives its teachings from the Saheb-e-Dilan, who are believed to reside near Mount Damavand. The Ahuna Vairya is a sacred hymn of this religion that should be recited upon entering a house, according to the Denkard. Members of this religion are initiated through the navjote ceremony, after which they must wear the Sedreh and Kushti. This religion's Book of Arda Viraf describes the journey of Viraf, who is guided through the afterlife by the angel (*) Adar after crossing the Chinvat bridge. An important text of this religion is the Qissa-i Sanjan, which ends with refugees settling in Gujarat and establishing a Fire Temple. This religion's teachings describe the conflict between Ahura Mazda and Angra Mainyu, and its primary sacred texts are collected in the Avesta. For 10 points, name this Persian religion founded by a namesake prophet.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["A controversial film made by a member of this movement titled Fill The Void was released in 2012. Aaron of Karlin was a significant scholar of this movement whose early growth was fueled by large numbers of Sabbateans joining this movement. Its founder feuded with Jakob Frank, and Nachman of (*) Breslov founded a large branch of this movement. Leaders of this movement are termed tzaddikim, and members of this group frequently wear a shtreimel after marriage. The Chabad sect is the largest group within this movement, which Simon Dubnow called, \"the answer to the stress and sorrow of Jewish public life.\" Known for their pe'ot, for 10 points, name this sect of Judaism founded by Ba'al-Shem Tov, easily recognizable by their uncut sidecurls.", "Hasidic Judaism", "H"]
["This figure is angrily told that \"not a dog will bark at any person or animal.\" This figure orders a full quota of bricks to be made without the provision of straw. One of this figure's adversaries complains he will not be able to relay a message to this figure without stuttering. This figure's two magicians, Jannes and Jambres, were confronted with the sign of a staff turning into a (*) snake. This figure leads a chariot army to Pi-hahiroth to chase a certain group, after which his entire army drowns in the Red Sea. He loses his firstborn son in the last of a series of ten calamities that befall his nation, including a locust swarm and the Nile turning to blood. For 10 points, name this Biblical character whose heart God hardens after each of ten plagues which Moses inflicts on his nation for keeping Jews in captivity.", "Pharaohs in the Bible", "H"]
["Specific answer required. The founding of this group undermined the authority of the masands, and Mata Sahib is known as this group's \"mother.\" Members of this group are expected to abide by a code of conduct known as rahit. On Baisakhi Day 1699, the first members of this group offered their heads upon the request of their leader and immediately became known as the Panj Pyare; that leader was (*) Gobind Singh. In order to join this group, an initiate must undergo a ceremony in which sugar water is stirred with a khanda, adopt the surname Singh or Kaur, and start wearing the Five K's. For 10 points, give this term meaning \"pure ones,\" which denotes the community of Sikhs who have undergone the amrit ceremony and fully committed themselves to abstinence from hair cutting, alcohol, halal meat, and adultery.", "Panj Pyare", "H"]
["Preceded by Bon, which practiced worship of the Transcendent Lords, the oldest school of this religion followed the Nine Ways transmitted by Shenrab. In addition to the Nyingma, which acknowledges the 25 disciples, the Kagyu, and the Sakya, this religion differentiates itself from its youngest school, the Gelug, known for their allegiance to the (*) Mongols. Members of this sect, who address respected leaders as \"Rinpoche,\" may use prayer wheels to invoke deities like Chenrezig. This sect, divided into Yellow and Red Hats, locates its leaders after having them select from the items chosen by their predecessors. Formerly centered in Lhasa, for 10 points, identify this religion, currently led by Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama.", "Tibetan Buddhism", "H"]
["This book states that man is \"entangled with infinite questions\" as part of his creation. This text notes that men should refrain from great ambitions, focusing on the fact that all are fated to die, and that men should enjoy simple pleasures as gifts from God. After proposing a number of reasons for man's vanity, the narrator of this text focuses on the sinfulness of (*) women as the most salient cause. One part of this book begins by asking \"who is as the wise man?\" Evangelical scholars argue for a pre-exile date, focusing on the Rabbinic tradition that Koheleth, as the author calls himself, was King Solomon in his old age. For 10 points, identify this book of the Bible that differs from the other wisdom books like Psalms and Proverbs by doubting the efficacy of wisdom itself, with a title from the Greek word for preacher.", "Ecclesiastes", "H"]
["The second section of this work asserts that humans are God's \"workmanship\" and that Jesus broke the \"wall of partition\" separation humans.The last chapter of this book contains references to the Shield of Faith, Helmet of Salvation, Sword of the Spirit, and Armor of God as well as a conclusion addressing Tychicus. Chapter 5 of this book contains the much maligned verse, \"Wives should be (*) subordinate to their Husbands as to the Lord,\" part of an extended metaphor comparing human marriage to the marriage of Christ and his Church. This Letter commands the readers to \"Walk then as children of light,\" since they are part of the Body of Christ. This letter is believed to have been written during its author's first imprisonment in Rome. For 10 points, name this \"Queen of Epistles\" written by St. Paul to a Church in Asia Minor.", "Epistle to the Ephesians", "H"]
["The Catholic bishop Emmanuel Milingo has attracted controversy for his close relationship with this religion, including his 2001 participation in one of its rituals. After studying members of this religion for seven years, Eileen Barker wrote a book about the process of conversion to this religion. This religion holds that people can be restored to a prelapsarian state through the process of (*) indemnity. One ritual in this religion, which begins with the participants striking each other three times, is intended to make its participants part of God's sinless lineage. This religion's major scripture is the Divine Principle. This religion's \"blessing ceremony\" is a ritual in which large numbers of couples are married or have their marriages rededicated. For 10 points, name this church founded by Sun Myung Moon.", "Unification Church", "H"]
["Forgetting obligatory parts of this practice can be rectified by performing the Sujud Sahwi. In 2007, Malaysia's National Fatwa Council created a guidebook on how to carry out this practice in a low-gravity environment for astronaut Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor. One form of this practice is performed when seeking guidance and is known as Istikharah. The (*) jumu'ah is a type of this practice that is performed in groups on Friday, replacing the \u1e93uhr. This practice must be preceded by a ritual ablution known as wu\u1e0d\u016b', and it consists of repeating units called raka'\u0101t. It is performed while facing the qibla, which points in the direction of the Ka'aba in Mecca. For 10 points, name this pillar of Islam, requiring five daily prayers.", "Salah", "H"]
["One group depicted in this text went on a 344-day voyage, and Coriantumr was that group's last living descendant. One character in this text studies a record written by Zeniff. It was supposedly originally translated using a pair of seer stones called Urim and Thummim, which were placed in a top hat. This text was originally written in unknown characters referred to as (*) \"Reformed Egyptian.\" In the first chapters of the book, which is supposedly the record of Manasseh's descendants, a family is led out of Jerusalem before the Babylonians overtake the ancient city. After the family makes it to the new Promised Land, their descendants divide into the Nephites and the Lamanites. This text's book of Third Nephi details Jesus Christ's visit to the Americas after his resurrection and his establishment of a peaceful society. For 10 points, name this sacred text of the Latter Day Saints.", "Book of Mormon", "H"]
["A form of this practice known as the endura was performed by Cathars after receiving the consolamentum. In 2001, Satguru Sivaya Subramuniyaswami engaged in a form of this practice known as prayopavesa after being diagnosed with intestinal cancer. A form of this practice in Jainism is only allowed when one has no remaining responsibilities and serves to rid a person of karma; that form of this practice is known as Sallekhana or (*) Santhara. During the Hindu festival of Karwa Chauth, women engage in this practice for the longevity of their husbands. This action can be preceded each day by the suhoor and ended with the consumption of dates during the iftar, and it is forbidden on Eid al-Fitr. For 10 points, name this practice that serves as the pillar of sawm in Islam, considered obligatory during the month of Ramadan.", "Fasting", "H"]
["The first of these works compares men to a tree and evil people to \"chaff driven by the wind.\" Another of these works uses the metaphor of an iron rod smashing a potter's vessel. One of these works explains that \"we hung our harps\" \"on the poplar trees\" and asks \"how could we sing a song\u0085 in a foreign land?\" The last of these works begins and ends with the same word of praise, and a non-canonical one of these compares Pompey the Great to a dragon. The speaker of another of these works asks that he might be (*) \"cleansed with hyssop\" and observes that \"the bones you have broken shall rejoice.\" The most famous of these works explains that \"though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I shall fear no evil,\" for \"The Lord is my Shepherd.\" For 10 points, name these one hundred fifty songs in the Bible, many of which are attributed to King David.", "Psalms", "H"]
["Like Hanukkah, this holiday features the addition of the Al-Ha-Nissim to the daily prayers. The charity obligatory on this day is known as \"mattanot la-evyonim.\" On this holiday, bizarre questions about Jewish law are asked in this holiday's namesake form of Torah. At the Seudat meal on this day, one is supposed to be unable to tell \"arur\" from \"baruch.\" This holiday is when the \"misloach manot\" gift baskets are handed out, and this holiday in the month of Adar is when gragers are used to drown out the name of Haman. For 10 points, name this holiday where Jews get drunk and wear costumes to celebrate Esther and Mordechai's end to a Persian genocide plot.", "Purim", "H"]
["Jacob Baradeus, a follower of this doctrine, ordained many followers of this doctrine as priests in Edessa. Peter Mongas became a supporter of this heresy late in life and the Tome of Leo addressed this heresy. Apollinaris of Alexandria is believed to have started this heresy in response to the growth of Nestorianism. The Coptic Church broke off from the rest of the Church after being accused of following this heresy whose foremost proponent was Eutyches. This heresy was denounced that the Council of Chalcedon. For ten points, name this heresy that claimed that, after the Incarnation, Jesus had one nature, as opposed to the Catholic belief that Jesus was both human and divine.", "Monophysitism", "H"]
["Hymns composed as part of this movement comprise the Tirumurai. Groups which spread this practice included the Alvars and the Nayanars. An important leader of this movement translated the Ramayana into Awadhi to create the Ramcaritamnas. This movement, which included Tulsidas, was spread by the Sant Mat teachers out of Tamil Nadu beginning in the thirteenth century. For 10 points, identify this form of yoga which is the personal devotion to a god in Hinduism", "Bhakti", "H"]
["Jeffrey Satinover documented Michael Ber Weissmandl's work on these entities, which included an analysis of the hanging of Haman's ten sons. Brendan McKay worked with Dror Bar-Natan, Gil Kalai, and Maya Bar-Hillel to rebut the existence of these entities, and he claimed to use them to derive details about the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin from Moby-Dick. The primary method for discovering these entities is the Equidistant Letter Sequence method. Doron Witztum, Eliyahu Rips, and Alexander Rotenberg promoted them in a paper claiming that the names and lifespans of great Rabbis are spatially more compact in the Book of Genesis than expected by chance. The existence of these messages was popularized in three books by Michael Drosnin. For 10 points, identify these hidden messages supposedly found in the first five books of the Old Testament.", "Bible code", "H"]
["According to a preface in the Septuagint, this book's traditional attribution comes from 2 Chronicles 25:35. This book's fourth chapter exclaims \"How is the gold become dim!\" in describing how the sons of Zion are esteemed only as much as a clay pot. The claim that \"It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed\" appears in this book's third chapter, which is three times as long as any other chapter. This book is the source of the readings during the first nocturn of Matins of Tenebrae during the Holy Triduum. The first four of this book's five chapters are acrostic poems that spell out the Hebrew alphabet. The book is recited during Tisha B'Av to mourn the destruction of the First Temple. It describes how the Lord was \"as an enemy\" for allowing the destruction of Jerusalem. For 10 points, name this Old Testament book full of grieving, traditionally attributed to Jeremiah.", "Le\u00e7ons de t\u00e9n\u00e8bres (Couperin)", "H"]
["Different interpretations in this book hinge on the definition of the Greek words kenoo and harpagmos, with the latter potentially meaning that Christ was equal with God but did not follow Adam in \"snatching after\" temptation. Both of those words appear in its Carmen Christi hymn. Its author compares his knowledge of Christ to \"but dung\" in an argument against the \"confidence in the flesh\" of the Judaizers. The author of this work pledges to send Epaphroditus to the title group of people so they can \"honor men like him\" and attacks brother Christians who are trying to make him jealous while he sits in jail. This epistle was written to a church first located in the house of Lydia and follows Ephesians. For 10 points, name this Pauline epistle to a church in the namesake Macedonian city.", "Epistle to the Philippians", "M"]
["Tertullian called penance and this process the two \"planks\" on which people may be saved from shipwrecks, in his book titled for it. Catechumens have never undergone this process. In the Bible, an instance of this process leads to the line, \"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.\" Variants of this practice include affusion and aspersion. Matthew 3:11 mentions that \"he that cometh after me\" will perform this with the Holy Ghost and with fire, instead of \"in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.\" A namesake font is used for this practice. For 10 points, name this first sacrament, a ritual that John performed on Jesus by pouring water on him.", "Baptism", "M"]
["Tertullian called penance and this process the two \"planks\" on which people may be saved from shipwrecks, in his book titled for it. Catechumens have never undergone this process. In the Bible, an instance of this process leads to the line, \"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.\" Variants of this practice include affusion and aspersion. Matthew 3:11 mentions that \"he that cometh after me\" will perform this with the Holy Ghost and with fire, instead of \"in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.\" A namesake font is used for this practice. For 10 points, name this first sacrament, a ritual that John performed on Jesus by pouring water on him.", "Baptism", "M"]
["One holiday in this region celebrates the release of one of its central religious leaders from the Gwalior Fort. That festival, Bandi Shor, is the second most important festival in this religion after the new year, Vaisakhi. Adherents to this religion pray at temples called gurdwaras. One must recite the Mool Mantar while undergoing this religion's baptism ceremony, and once the baptism is completed, the new member of the Khalsa is required to wear the items known as the \"5 Ks.\" The spiritual leader of this religion is a personification of its holy text, the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Guru Nanak which holds holy the Golden Temple at Amritsar.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["The First Sphere of these figures includes \"Thrones\", who supposedly appear as wheels covered in eyes. In Islam, the Kiraman Katibin, Munkar, and Nakir are examples of these figures. One of these figures asks Muhammad about submission and faith in a famous hadith. Balaam's donkey refused to move after spotting one of these creatures. Lot offered his two daughters to a mob that wanted to rape two of these figures who were staying as guests. The highest ranks of them include seraphim and cherubim, and one appeared to Mary during the Annunciation. For 10 points, name these heavenly beings exemplified by Gabriel and Raphael.", "Angel", "M"]
["Texts in this religion are called either Sruti, meaning what is heard, or Smriti, meaning a recollection. One text of this religion is the Laws of Manu. One sect of this religion is the Smarta sect, which was founded by Shankara. This religion's oldest text is divided into ten Mandalas. The accumulation of material wealth, or artha, is one of the purusarthas, the four main goals of this religion. Followers of this faith aim for release, or moksha, and believe in a natural law or duty called dharma. Members of this religion believe in a cycle called samsara and its religious texts include the Upanishads and Vedas. For 10 points, name this most popular Indian religion.", "Hinduism", "M"]
["This religion's founder was motivated to action when his favorite dancer suddenly died in the middle of a performance. Members of this religion bow to five different groups of people while performing the Namokar mantra. The most important scripture of this religion is the Purvas. People in this religion are called \"Ford-makers\" if they help others cross the \"ocean\" of material desires called tirtha. Monks in the Digambara sect of this religion practice nudity, and many members, following ahimsa, wear cloth over their mouths to avoid accidentally killing insects. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Mahavira that emphasizes nonviolence.", "Jainism", "M"]
["This man once redeemed a murderer who wore a necklace of the fingers of his victims. Failed assassination attempts on this man involved a boulder that ended up splintering into pieces and a drunken elephant, and were planned by Devadatta. This man hailed from Shakya, and on the night of his conception his mother Maya dreamt of being pierced by an elephant with six tusks. This figure was shocked in his youth to encounter a diseased man, a decaying corpse, and an ascetic, and this prince later sat beneath the Bodhi tree. For 10 points, name this teacher of the Eightfold Path and the Four Noble Truths, the founder of a namesake Asian religion.", "Depictions of Gautama Buddha in film", "M"]
["This book mentions that \"every seed-bearing herb\" shall be for food. The sixth part of the yearly reading of the Torah focuses on the Toledot section of this book, while the Hebrew name for its first chapter comes from its first word, Bereshit. Several sections of this book's first chapter end with the phrase, \"And there was evening and there was morning.\" In this book, the central figure instructs, \"Increase and multiply and fill the earth\" to characters made in \"his own image and likeness.\" This book's third verse has the line, \"Let there be light.\" For 10 points, name this book of the Bible in which God creates the heaven and the earth, the first book of the Bible.", "Book of Genesis", "M"]
["The volunteer organization Hadassah was named for this book's title character. Minor characters in this book include Bigthan and Teresh, and it takes place in the city of Shushan. Aside from the Song of Songs, this book of the Bible is traditionally the only one not to include the word \"God.\" When read aloud from a megillah, this book is often interrupted with the sound of \"groggers\" to drown out the name of the antagonist. Its title character gains the favor of King Ahasuerus after Vashti is dismissed. Mordechai refuses to bow down to Haman in this book, but the queen's courage saves all the Jews. For 10 points, name this book of the Bible traditionally read on Purim.", "Book of Esther", "M"]
["While praying on a roof, a character in this book has a vision of four-legged animals brought upon a sheet that God commands him to kill and eat, though they are not kosher. In the 28th and final chapter of this book, a man is found to be immune to snakebite while on Malta. Ananias and Sapphira suddenly perish in this book, which begins with the descent of the Holy Spirit. Dedicated to Theophilus, this book sees a man struck blind on his way to Damascus after witnessing the stoning of Stephen. Though not a Gospel, this book was likely written by St. Luke. For 10 points, name this fifth book of the New Testament which details the deeds of Peter and Paul after Christ's ascension.", "Acts of the Apostles", "M"]
["The Wentworth Letter outlined some of this religion's beliefs. Priests that lead quorums in this religion own \"keys\" delivered from Oliver Cowdery, who was one of this faith's \"Three Witnesses.\" Men in this religion enter either the Aaronic or Melchizedek priesthoods. Illustrations of Egyptian funeral records are found in one of this religion's holy texts, The Pearl of Great Price. Members of this faith believe that Lehi and Nephi sailed across the Atlantic. An angel named Moroni revealed some golden plates engraved with \"reformed Egyptian\" to this religion's founder. For 10 points, name this Christian movement popular in Utah and founded by Joseph Smith.", "Mormonism", "M"]
["This man was saved from certain death because a spider constructed a web across the entrance of the cave he was hiding in. This man settled a conflict between clans by setting the Black Stone in the center of a piece of cloth and having all the clans carry it. He adopted a son named Zaid and visited Heaven and Hell on a winged steed Buraq during the second half of his Night Journey. At the Cave of Hira, this man told Jibreel that he did not know how to read. Hadiths consist of the sayings and actions of this man, who in the hijra fled from Mecca to Medina. For 10 points, name this man to whom the Koran was revealed, the central prophet of Islam.", "Muhammad", "M"]
["According to Luke, immediately after the Resurrection, Jesus consumes fish and this food with the disciples. Samson asks the Philistines a riddle about how one can extract this food from the beast of a wild animal. Saul nearly kills Jonathan after Jonathan consumes this food. While living in the wilderness, John the Baptist subsides on locusts and this substance. Manna is usually described as tasting like wafers baked with this foodstuff. On Rosh Hashanah, Jews traditionally consume apples mixed with this substance. The Promised Land of Canaan is said to flow with milk and this substance. For 10 points, name this sweet food that can be extracted from beehives.", "Honey", "M"]
["This movement suffered a schism during the leadership of Jabez Bunting. A prayer in this denomination notes that, \"I am no longer my own, but thine\" and was written in preparation for a Covenant Service. The founder of this denomination authored \"A Plain Account of Christian Perfection\" and disagreed with double predestination, borrowing many of his ideas from Arminius. Francis Asbury served as a missionary to America for this religious movement, as did Thomas Coke. George Whitefield was an early preacher in this movement, which sought to reform the Church of England. For 10 points, name this Christian denomination founded by John Wesley.", "Methodism", "M"]
["A Biblical passage set at this location mentions that the Lord was not in the wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire. After he's threatened for his life by King Ahab, Elijah winds up at this place. At this place, the Levites kill three thousand of their brothers, friends, and neighbors, and are called a \"stiff-necked people\" by God. According to Deuteronomy, this place should more accurately be called Horeb. A man here is forced to wait for two periods of forty days and forty nights after he drops a chiseled piece of stone, prompting the other Israelites to construct the Golden Calf. For 10 points, name this mountain where Moses received the Ten Commandments.", "Mount Sinai", "M"]
["At the beginning of this process, nine people are randomly chosen, including three scrutineers who poke pieces of paper with a needle. People over the age of eighty are not allowed to participate in this process. This process lasts between the extra omnes proclamation and the Habemus Papam. Before this process can occur, the Camerlengo must hit a corpse on the head with a silver hammer. The sede vacante results in one of these meetings, which is the subject of an Apostolic Constitution passed by John Paul II allowing a majority vote to eventually triumph. White smoke from the Sistine Chapel signals its end. For 10 points, name this gathering of cardinals to elect a new Pope.", "List of papal elections", "M"]
["Some adherents of this faith believe in a karma-like \"Rule of Three.\" The major statement of this faith originates from 26 rhymed couplets written by Lady Gwen Thompson, and is usually rendered as \"An it harm none do what ye will.\" This dualistic religion venerates the Horned God and the Triple Goddess. Members of this religion make up the majority of those who celebrate Imbolc and Beltane, which are two of the eight Sabbats spaced equally in the year. Gerald Gardner, or Scire, popularized this faith in 1954. Some members of this faith congregate at covens. For 10 points, name this neopagan faith frequently associated with witchcraft.", "Wicca", "M"]
["[Note to teams: Description acceptable.] A barber named Upali was responsible for recording the rules governing these people's actions. These people do not eat food after noon, one of the Ten Precepts obeyed by some of them. They must be at least twenty years old, or else they are called sramanera. A part of the Tripitaka called the Vinaya Pitaka governs the behavior of these people, who wear a three-piece garment called a kasaya, which is often brown or saffron. The sangha consists mainly of these people, who are called Bhikku or Bhiksu in Pali or Sanskrit respectively. For 10 points, name these people who work toward nirvana while living in secluded and often silent monasteries.", "Bhikkhu", "H"]
["Nikah Halala is a concept from Sharia law that limits the number of times one may participate in this ceremony. In Bengal, a man participating in this ceremony may wear a topor, a type of conical hat, while the Shinto equivalent of this ceremony involves a white scarf. Among the Hindus, this type of ceremony involves the Aupasana, a sacred fire that is divided into two parts. Joseph Smith preached that this ceremony could make the Lamanites \u0096 or Native Americans \u0096 a \"white and delightsome people.\" The Catholic Church requires those who wish to undergo this ceremony to go through a process called Pre-Cana. Among the Jews, this ceremony can be reversed with a get and involves writing a ketubah, or contract. For 10 points, name this ceremony whose Anglican rite calls for the phrase \"I do.\"", "Wedding", "H"]
["One leader of this organized religion changed his name to Anaxagoras. Payan condemned this religion for being excessively feminine. Adherents of this religion erected statues representing sleep on top of graves, and posted the inscription \"Death is an Eternal Sleep\" at cemeteries. This religion's holidays included the \"Feast of Victory\" and \"Feast of Brutus\" and this religion's places of worship were adorned with the scripture \"To Philosophy.\" To discourage idolatry, Sophie Momoro was selected to portray this religion's namesake figure, most prominently at a ceremony where this religion's temple was established inside the desecrated Cathedral of Notre Dame. Replaced by the Cult of the Supreme Being, for 10 points name this atheistic cult adopted as the state religion of Revolutionary France.", "Cult of Reason", "H"]
["In an alternate story of this man's actions, his crime is given to another man named Samiri. In one story, this man stands between the living and the dead in order to stop a plague begun after the rebellion of Korah. In one account, this man dies on Mount Hor shortly after his garments are transferred to his son, Eleazar. His sons Nadab and Abihu are killed after they add unauthorized fire in a worship ceremony. This man claims that he took gold jewelry and threw it into a fire, which produced an infamous icon associated with him. He is first introduced after another figure complains about being \"slow of speech and tongue\" and thus requiring a spokesman. He constructs a Golden Calf as an idol during his brother's absence, and one object owned by this man turned into a snake to demonstrate the power of God.. For 10 points, name this first Israelite high priest, who had a namesake rod and was the older brother of Moses.", "Aaron", "H"]
["This work calls the word of God \"sharper than any two-edged sword\" in its section challenging readers to enter God's rest. In another section, it states that since you have become \"dull of hearing\" you need \"milk and not solid food.\" This text is notable because unlike those it is grouped with, it ignores the Masoretic Text and always quotes directly from the Septuagint, even when it is incorrect. This text contains the only known Biblical reference to the tradition that the prophet Isaiah was executed by being sawn in half in a section that describes the suffering of the Old Testament prophets. It opens with \"God, who \u0085 spoke in time past to the fathers by the prophets has in these last days spoken to us by His son,\" and its central point concerns Christ's role as a mediator of a new covenant. For 10 points, name this anonymously written epistle titled after the chosen people of God.", "Epistle to the Hebrews", "H"]
["It's not Hungary, but one theologian from this country took the Latin name Johannes Corvinus. Simon Episcopus led a reformist faction in this country called the Remonstrants. This nation's state church was deeply influenced by the conservative theologian Franciscus Gomarus. A 1632 document written in this country superceded the earlier Schleitheim Confession and contains Eighteen Articles, including two that endorse ecclesiastical bans on apostates and the shunning of the wicked. A synod held in this country discussed the Quinquarticular Controversy, and saw a theologian from this nation condemned for articulating his namesake belief that man can choose to be saved, a denial of predestination. Home to the Synod of Dort and the Dordrecht Confession, for 10 points, name this largely Calvinist homeland of Menno Simons and Jacob Arminius.", "Netherlands", "H"]
["John Spong has controversially argued that this man was a homosexual, and it is likely that this man placed the penis of Eunice's adult son into his mouth while performing mesisah. A Coptic text describes this man convincing a young woman named Thecla to remain a virgin. This man was a student of Gamaliel the Elder, the grandson of Hilel. This man cryptically claimed to have \"fought wild beasts\" in Ephesus, and a conspiracy to kill this man failed when he was smuggled in a basket through a hole in the wall. Coats were laid at this man's feet when he attended the stoning of St. Stephen. This man was found praying near the House of Judas, and scales fell from his eyes after he met Ananias. This man's notable pronouncements include that women should stay silent in church and that Christians do not need to follow Jewish law. For 10 points, name this man who was converted to Christianity on the Road to Damascus and wrote many epistles found in the New Testament.", "Paul the Apostle", "H"]
["The Sana'a document, discovered in 1972, is evidence that this process began earlier than previously believed. Zaid ibn Thabit was put in charge of this process, which became a priority after the Battle of Yamama resulted in the death of 700 hafizes. Shi'ites believe that Ali completed this process six months after the death of Muhammad, but his attempt was not accepted by the community. Each step in this process had to be confirmed by at least two companions of Muhammad, and it notably involved the collection of stones and palm leaves. The final product of this process was canonized by the Caliph Uthman, for whom it is sometimes named, and used the archaic Kufic script. For 10 points, name this process, important in the early history of Islam, which turned the orally recited revelations of Muhammad into a book.", "Quran", "H"]
["As part of this religion's child-naming ceremony, a holy man turns to a random page of scripture, reads the first word he sees, and gives the child a name beginning with the same first letter. Members of this religion perform the Bhog ceremony after completing something, and at major life milestones may perform the ceremony of Akhand Path, which involves 48 hours of reading scripture. This religion uses the term \"hukam\" to refer to the divine will. The holiday of Vaisakhi commemorates the first five men to be formally initiated into this religion, which involves being anointed with sugar water. A visitor to one of this religion's places of worship may hear the Ardas prayer and will be offered Sacred Pudding. Adult members of this religion are considered members of the Khalsa Order and wear a bracelet, a comb, and a kirpan dagger. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "H"]
["Alternate forms of this ritual object include the \"kikar\" and the \"rakik.\" Following Passover, there is a tradition that emerged from the Ukraine to engage with a form of this object that is shaped like a key, and which is called the \"shlissel\" form of it. In order to be \"yotzei,\" or compliant, with requirements involving it, a follower must surpass a unit known as a \"k'zait\" and which derives from varying interpretations on the size of objects obtained by the biblical \"meraglim,\" the spies from Deuteronomy. Prior to usage of this object, one conducts the \"netilat yadayim\" and says the \"ha-motzi\" blessing, and afterwards recites \"birkat ha'mazon,\" with additional blessings if he is with at least two or nine other males. It is notably consumed with honey in the period following Rosh-Hashanah. Some rabbis exempt those with Celiac disease from requirements involving it, while others require usage of gluten-free alternatives. Replaced with Matzah during Passover this is, for 10 points, what Jewish ritual bread?", "Challah", "H"]
["Bruce and Sandra Tanner were major critics of this religious movement during the 20th Century. Other critics of this religious movement forged the White Salamander letter in an effort to discredit its leader. The Anthon Transcript is an important primary source from the founding of this religious movement, whose early leaders preached the doctrine of Blood Atonement. E.D. Howe viciously attacked this religious movement in a book titled \"[This Movement] Unvailed\", in which he linked this movement to the writings of Samuel Spaulding. This movement may have been influenced by Ethan Smith, whose book View of the Hebrews argued that the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel migrated to the New World. For 10 points, name this religious movement based on the Golden Plates found by Joseph Smith.", "Mormonism", "H"]
["Thomas Beecham conducted a bombastic 1959 recording of this work based on a re-orchestration of it by Eugene Goossens. The composer of this work adapted portions of it from his cantatas Quel fior che all' alba ride and N\u00f2, di voi non vo' fidarmi. The first part of this work alludes to rural Italian bagpipers called pifferari in a \"pastoral symphony\" marked Pifa, which is followed by a recitative which uses string arpeggios to represent the beating of angel's wings. Examples of word-painting in this work include the separation of the vocal parts on the words \"have gone astray\" in the aria \"All we like sheep,\" as well as the contrast between the high notes on the words \"mountain\" and \"hill\" and the low note on the word \"low\" in the aria \"Ev'ry valley shall be exalted.\" The first of this oratorio's three parts includes the aria \"For unto us a child is born,\" and is commonly called the Christmas section. For 10 points, name this oratorio by Handel, which features the Hallelujah chorus.", "Messiah", "H"]
["This action is followed by the iqama, which is timed either to allow a person to finish a meal or to allow for two optional rak'ahs. If performed near sunset, this action is usually done with fewer melismas, allowing it to be completed sooner, while the fajr version of this act is performed early in the morning. This practice was adopted after the future Caliph Umar had a vision that Muslims should distinguish themselves from Jews and Christians. This action is often performed on a special platform, and the first to do it was Bilal, an Abyssinian slave. The person performing this action turns his head to the left side while twice repeating the phrase \"Come to Success\". Both the Sunni and Shi'ite versions begin with the takbir by reciting \"Allahu Akbar\" four times before mentioning salat. For 10 points, name this action performed five times daily by the muezzin from a minaret.", "Takfir", "H"]
["According to this religion, cucumbers are foods that contain high amounts of the essence of goodness and are offered only to the chosen. In China, its religious leaders were referred to as \"Ma-Huang,\" or \"yellow hemp,\" since the actual term of \"Mo-Wang\" is homonymous with \"Demon King.\" Followers of this religion included Mar Ammo and Faustus of Mileve. This religion's demon of Az was later incorporated into Zoroastrianism, and it believes in a World of Darkness that follows the Three Creations. The church is divided into the \"chosen\" or the \"elect,\" who take the vows of the religion, and the \"hearers,\" who are believers who have not yet taken the vows. This religion's eponymous prophet wrote a 22 part gospel, the Evangelion. This religion was persecuted by the Sassanid Dynasty, but is perhaps best known as the former faith of the author of City of God. For 10 points, name this religion abandoned by St. Augustine that was known for its dualism.", "Manichaeism", "H"]
["This figure was depicted with the head of a lion and the body of a snake. This figure was sometimes called \"Yao,\" but more commonly his names were given as Skalas and Yaltabaoth. According to the Ophites, this figure was assisted by seven archons. After being born, this figure was hidden in a cloud, leading him to grow up ignorant of reality. This figure's mother is either Achamoth, or her mother Sophia, making him a corruption of divine wisdom. Some believers equated this figure with the Christian Satan, while more radical ones equated this figure with the God of the Old Testament. For 10 points, name this false god that Gnostics believed created and ruled the material world, in opposition to the true God.", "Demiurge", "H"]
["The second in command of these people was known as the \"Three Brethren,\" who had to lead the chanting of the Pater Noster every 33 days. Much of what we know about this group was written by Guy De Cheliac, who wrote about this group's medicinal practices. This group was at one point led by Verturino of Bergamo, who took this group on daily pilgrimages to the mountains outside of the village of Trentino. This group often carried large purple banners that displayed sayings of the Virgin Mary. One branch of this group was known as the Bianchi, which was led by a blind man who claimed to be a prophet. This group sang songs known as Geisslerlieder in the Holy Roman Empire, where they were known as the Brotherhood of the Cross. Members of this group often attacked gamblers, prostitutes, and Jews when they entered villages, and their goal was to escape the \"Dance of Death.\" For 10 points, identify this religious movement popular during the Black Death, which involved people beating themselves for repentance.", "Geisslerlieder", "H"]
["Nehemiah 8:5 provides the basis for one part of this practice known as \"hagbah,\" which is paired with the practice of \"gelilah,\" while mishaps during this practice can result in a congregation being obligated to fast for a day. One practice for proper fulfillment of this action involves notations which are not visible known as \"traup\" or \"neginot,\" the rarest of which is the \"shalshelet.\" This practice is interrupted for 7 \"aliyot,\" the first two of which are reserved for the \"cohen\" and \"levy.\" Lesser forms of it are practiced during the Monday and Thursday morning prayers and before a particular instance of this, a father is called to recite a blessing that frees him from the \"evils\" or misdeeds of his offspring. Whether women can participate in this action, after which an object is paraded around the congregation for kissing, is a controversy in Modern Orthodoxy. Requiring all males over 13 to participate on a holiday following Sukkot, for 10 points, identify this action, in which portions of the Pentateuch are read from a scroll.", "Torah reading", "H"]
["Since 1990, this organization has held a yearly protest at the School of the Americas, in response to six of its members being killed in El Salvador by alumni. New members of this group undergo the process of \"formation\". A foundational text of this organization prescribes four themed weeks of meditation designed to be done on retreat. At meetings called \"General Congregations\", members of this group elect their leader, the Superior General, who serves for life and has been nicknamed the \"Black Pope\" for his vestments and power. Members of this group follow its founder's \"Spiritual Exercises\", and all members of this group take an oath of loyalty to the Pope. For 10 points, name this Catholic order founded by Ignatius of Loyola, one of whose members was recently elected as Pope Francis.", "Society of Jesus", "H"]
["In this religion, humans are not considered to be born into society, but rather into the universe. Humans used to be gods, but the increasing complexity of their world brought them down to a lower level. This religion's central text is critical of the narrow minded approach to the universe offered by science, describes enlightenment as a \"Celestial eye\" reaching its highest point. This religion's practices have names such as \"penetrating the cosmic extreme\" and \"divine Buddha showing a thousand arms.\" At the heart of this religion is the Dharma Wheel practice, which focuses on the three central tenets of the universe, truthfulness, forbearance, and compassion. For 10 points, name this Chinese religion, based in qigong exercise, whose practitioners are tortured and forcibly organ-harvested by the Chinese government.", "Falun Gong", "H"]
["One parable in this religion speaks of a man who follows a narrow path separating a river of fire to the south and a river of water to the north. That story is known as the \"Parable of the White Path\" and was written by Shandao, who was an adherent to this faith. This religion also speaks of two paths by which an adherent may seek the stage of non-retrogression in a world afflicted with the Five Turbidities. The Sukhavativyuha (Sook-Hah-Va-Tiv-Yoo-Hah) is one of the principle scriptures of this school, and recounts how the bodhisattva Dharmakara took forty-eight vows that led to his rebirth as the \"Infinite Light.\" Henceforth, practitioners of this religion who receive salvation by faith often repeat that figure's name in an effort to be reborn in this religion's namesake haven. Popularized by the Chinese starting from the 5th century C.E., for 10 points name this school of Mahayana Buddhism whose members worship the Amitabha buddha.", "Pure Land Buddhism", "H"]
["In this man's first appearance, he used twelve yoke of oxen belonging to his father Shaphat to plow a field before slaughtering them to feed the people and burning his own plough to cook the meat. He's not Moses, but this man once struck the Jordan River with another man's cloak, causing it to part. This man cursed his own servant, Gehazi, with leprosy for accepting a payment for a miracle. This man granted fertility to a barren woman in Shunem, later reviving her dead child, and he asked Na'aman to bathe in the Jordan to cure his leprosy. To prevent a widow's children from being sold into slavery, he ordered her to miraculously fill jars of oil and sell them. After some children mocked his baldness, he cursed them and two she-bears mangled them. This man asked to inherit two-thirds of the spirit of his master, whom he saw ascend in a chariot of fire. For 10 points, name this disciple and successor of Elijah.", "Elisha", "H"]
["This Rabbi founded a synagogue on Ha-Yehudim street in the old city of Jerusalem that bears his name. His alleged burial site is a point of contention in the area of Wadi Joz, which became the subject of multiple Israeli Supreme Court cases on the general status of so-called \"holy sites.\" He discussed the work of a contemporary in a letter addressed to the Jews of Aragon, and his belief regarding an immutable aspect of the soul led him to champion yibum, or levirate marriage. That opinion is included in his Torat ha-adam, and his final work was a commentary on the five books of Moses that draws heavily from the Aggadah, thus differentiating it from the commentary of Rashi, with whom his commentary often engages. He is best known, however, for an event in which a disciple of James I made him defend the validity of his religion. For 10 points, name this Spanish medieval Rabbi who won a disputation against the Apostate Pablo Christiani in 1263, and who is not to be confused with the similarly named author of the Guide for the Perplexed.", "Nahmanides", "H"]
["A set of Scriptural references to this man is interrupted when the author accuses readers of being \"dull of hearing.\" This man's name appears after a reference to a \"womb of the dawn\" and the \"dew of youth\" in the original Psalm 110, verse 4. In Rabbinic lore, Noah's son Shem is equated with this man. According to one text, Levi was \"yet in the loins of his father\" upon meeting this man. This non-Jewish worshipper of \"El Elyon,\" or \"God Most High,\" brought out bread and wine before giving a tithe to all in his presence in the book of Genesis. Before they go on mission, almost all baptized adult Mormon males join his namesake \"priesthood.\" His name means \"my king is righteous\" in Hebrew, and Jesus called a priest after the order of this man by the New Testament's Epistle to the Hebrews. For 10 points, name this king of Salem and archetypical priest who blesses Abram.", "Melchizedek", "H"]
["This man once spent time in a common prison chained by the foot to his companion Calisto, and in Paris he was defended from calumnious charges by Matthieu Ory. Peter Faber was a disciple of this man, who drew lifelong inspiration from Ludolph of Saxony's Vita Christi. His major work advocates allowing the soul to \"free itself from all inordinate affections\" and promotes the use of the \"general examen of conscience\". He was injured in the Battle of Pamplona, after which he experienced a vision of the Virgin Mary and prayed in a cave near Manresa, experiences which formed the basis of a pedagogical work divided into four thematic \"weeks\". This patron saint of soldiers coined the phrase \"Ad maiorem Dei gloriam\", or \"for the greater glory of God\". This teacher of Francis Xavier wrote the Spiritual Exercises. For 10 points, identify this first Superior General of the Jesuits, a Spanish saint.", "Ignatius of Loyola", "H"]
["A Japanese ritual centering on one of these events involves pouring hydrangea tea on a statue of the Buddha. In the Middle Ages, St. Martin's Feast began a 40-day preparatory period for a holiday centering on one of these events. Another ritual based on one of these events contains the ceremony of the last doll and sees the central figure surrounded by seven damas and seven chambelanes. The \"Burda\" and \"Hamziyya\" poems are recited on an Islamic holiday based on one of these events called Mawlid. Ashkenazis hold a gathering called Shalom Zachar on the first Friday following one of these events. Another holiday commemorating one of these events occurs twelve days before Epiphany. In Judaism, roughly half of these events are followed eight days later by a mohel's performance of a bris. For 10 points, name these events, which Christians commemorate for Jesus on December 25th.", "50th Birthday Celebration Volume 12", "H"]
["This book mentions such animals as \"little foxes that ruin the vineyards\" and \"a mare among Pharaoh's chariots.\" It describes a vision of a palanquin made of the wood of Lebanon carried by sixty men and a dream about a woman being beaten by sentinels as she searches through a city for a man who had knocked on her door in the night. Verses from this book are read during Passover on Shabbat Chol HaMoed by Ashkenazi Jews. This book states that \"many waters cannot quench love\" and frequently beseeches the \"daughters of Jerusalem\" not to \"stir up or awaken love until it is ready.\" The two central figures of this book are a young Shulamite woman and her radiant, gazelle-like beloved, and its second section begins, \"I am the Rose of Sharon and the lily of the valleys\". For 10 points, name this erotic Old Testament book about two lovers, attributed to the wise son of David.", "Song of Songs", "H"]
["One tradition dictates that this item is used to counteract 100 of the 101 tears cried by Sisera's mother after Jael's murder of Sisera. Services involving this item often begin with one or seven readings of Psalm 47. It was long used on the first day of the Jubilee year, while during the Ottoman occupation, its use near the Western Wall was forbidden. The user of this item is known as the ba'al tekiah, and it can be used to produce the shevarim and the teruah, the latter of which gives its name to an alternate name for the first day of Tishrei. After a recitation of the Shema Yisrael, it is used to mark the end of Yom Kippur. The walls of Jericho fell after Joshua's priests blew these items. For 10 points, name this object used primarily during Rosh Hashanah celebrations, an instrument made from a curved animal horn.", "Shofar", "H"]
["Authorship of this work is credited in part to \"Sosthenes our brother\". Its antepenultimate verse contains the only Biblical appearance of the phrase \"Anathema Maranatha\", while its first chapter claims that a certain image presents \"a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles\". This book asserts that, since \"the woman is the glory of the man\", women should keep their heads covered while praying. In its most famous section, its author notes that \"when I became a man, I put away childish things\", and it likens Heaven as understood by the living to looking \"through a glass, darkly\". A certain concept is described as patient and kind, but not envious, in its thirteenth chapter, which also notes that \"faith, hope, and love abide\", and \"the greatest of these is love\". For 10 points, identify this epistle, the earliest one written by Paul to a church he founded in Greece.", "First Epistle to the Corinthians", "H"]
["A Central American community of these people was the subject of the 2006 documentary Living in a Perfect World. One of the foundational texts of this tradition contains a \"meditation on the twenty-fifth Psalm\" and the chapters \"The True Ministers\" and \"The Time of Grace\", and is known as the Foundation-Book. An early expression of this group's theology is found in the Dordrecht Confession. A disagreement among members of this Plautdietsch- speaking sect over the use of a form of shunning called meidung led to the splintering-off of a smaller, related group led by Jakob Amman that is now characterized by its resistance to technological change. For 10 points, the Amish split from which Anabaptist sect known for its simple dress and non-violence, which was founded by a Frisian preacher surnamed Simons?", "Mennonite", "H"]
["This man's youngest son stood atop Mount Gerizim and delivered the parable of the bramble-king. He's not Micah, but this father of Jotham had an ephod cast out of gold which the people \"prostituted themselves\" by worshiping. He avenged the deaths of his brothers by executing Zebah and Zalmunna after triumphing in the Valley of Jezreel. He was directed to lead his men to water and take with him only the ones who lapped the water like dogs. His initial doubts were allayed by a pair of miracles involving finding dew either on or off a piece of fleece. This man used trumpets to generate confusion while leading his army of 300 in defeating the Midianites. For 10 points, identify this fifth judge of the Israelites, whose name was adopted by a Bible-distributing organization.", "Gideon", "H"]
["In weddings in this religion, the bride and groom consult a clearness committee and exchange declarations. Children in this religion are taught to live by the acronym SPICES. Isaac Crewdson's writings caused the Beaconite split in this religion, which in its early existence was led by a group called the \"Valiant Sixty\". Yearly gatherings in East Africa led to Kenya becoming home to the largest population of this religion's members. The Richmond Declaration is an important text in this sect, which saw an early split between the Wilburites and Gurneyites. Central tenets of this non-Mormon sect include continuous revelation and the \"priesthood of all believers\". Its members, who participate in either \"programmed\" or \"unprogrammed\" worship and use \"plain speech\", believe they reflect the \"inner light\" of God. For 10 points, name this Christian denomination founded by George Fox, whose members tremble before God.", "Quakers", "H"]
["This text claims that because a certain figure \"has no obstruction\", he \"has no fear\", and it also asserts that all five aggregates are empty. The scholar Red Pine asserted that this text was specifically a response to Sarvastivadin teachings, and the monk Kukai wrote a notable commentary on it. Legendarily first delivered in a speech on Vulture Peak, it encourages Sariputra to summon Avalokitesvara, and it ends with the popular mantra \"gone, gone, gone beyond, gone completely beyond.\" Xuanzang created the standard Chinese translation of this text, which at only fourteen shlokas of thirty-two syllables each is much shorter than a similar one named for a diamond. For 10 points, identify this text of Mahayana Buddhism, named for the fact that it conveys the essence of Prajnaparamita, or perfect wisdom of compassion.", "Heart Sutra", "H"]
["The nahn ceremony in this religion involves the chewing of three pomegranate leaves, which gives an individual spiritual immortality. In the navjote rite of passage, a priest gives a child a white undervest known as a sudreh and wraps a lamb's wool cord made of 72 threads, the kushti, three times around the waist. Virtuous deceased members of this religion, rather than being dragged by a demon into the House of Lies, are led by Daena across the Chinvat Bridge and into heaven. Members of this religion worship in fire temples. Because corpses in this religion are exposed to druj, they are left for birds of prey on Towers of Silence. This religion's central texts include the Yasna, the Gathas, and the Avesta. For 10 points, name this dualist religion in which the evil Ahriman clashes with Ahura Mazda, named for its Persian founder.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["In the Mahabharata, the Brahmana Kausika travels to Mithila to meet a pious man who defends this action by in part by noting its prevalence under the great king Rantideva. Most lay adherents of Cao Dai avoid engaging in this practice for six to ten days per month. As long as the subject of this action is jhatka, it is allowed by some Shaivite Hindu sects. Mosaic law necessitates the removal of chelev and the gid hanasheh in a process called nikkur before one engages in this activity. The Reformation in Switzerland was sparked when Ulrich Zwingli publicly engaged in this activity during the first Sunday of Lent, while Leviticus 11:3 specifies that the targets of this activity must both \"chew the cud\" and have a split hoof. For 10 points, identify this activity which is strenuously avoided by Jain practitioners of ahimsa, as it is made possible by killing animals.", "Meat", "H"]
["The Epistle of Jude relates how this figure refused to make a direct accusation against Satan in a dispute over the body of Moses. The Eastern Orthodox Church celebrates an event in which he split a river directed by pagans against one of his sanctuaries, the Miracle of Chonae. He appeared in the form of an apparition to tell the Bishop of Siponto to build a church in his honor on Mount Gargano. A holiday named for this dedicatee of the Te Splendor hymn falls on September 29th and was traditionally associated with the beginning of autumn. In the Book of Daniel, an angel explains that this figure will step up to save Israel from a \"prince of Persia.\" He is sometimes depicted with scales because of his role in Catholic tradition of weighing the souls of the dead. Christian tradition assigns him four roles, one of which is to lead the forces of God against Satan. For 10 points, name this archangel.", "Michael (archangel)", "H"]
["In Maori religion, this process is known as \"Makutu lifting,\" while Ethiopian Christianity uses it to combat buda. Hindu practitioners of this activity are sometimes known as ojha. In 1974, the Anglican Communion created the \"Deliverance Ministry\" to provide access to this activity. In Islam, this process often involves the recitation of the Throne Verse, aims to reverse the effects of sihr, and is called ruqya. This practice, the subject of Frank Hammond's Pigs in the Parlor, was unsuccessfully attempted among some Ursuline nuns at Loudon in 1632. Notable Catholic subjects of this process include Anneliese Michel and a young Maryland boy known as \"Roland Doe\" or \"Robbie Mannheim\". For 10 points, name this activity performed in the New Testament when Jesus freed a man of Gerasenes from the evil spirit Legion.", "Exorcism", "M"]
["Leonard Barrett wrote a study of this religion; one of its foundational texts states that \"Gross Beauty is the Queen in Hell\" and is called The Promise Key. Women are called \"queens\" in this faith, whose pracitioners follow the largely vegetarian \"I-tal\" diet and use drums in nyabinghi sessions. These people refer to civilizations which cause \"downpression\" as Babylon, and use the name \"Jah\" for God. Its \"reasoning sessions\" often involve a sacred herb which they call ganja. For 10 points, name this religion which reveres an Ethiopian emperor as God and is hugely outnumbered by Christians in its home of Jamaica.", "Rastafari", "M"]
["One philosophical school in this religion believed in two levels of truth. One of its holy texts tells of a father who gets his child to leave a burning house with \"skillful means,\" or upaya. Many venerated beings in this faith took a vow to delay their departure from the world until they can help all other beings. One branch of religion has a name meaning \"Great Vehicle,\" and its founder was inspired by seeing an old man, a sick man, and a corpse along a road. It holds that \"all life is suffering\" among its Four Noble Truths, and its Mahayana branch looks to the Lotus Sutra and Eightfold Path. For 10 points, name this religion whose believers seek enlightened nirvana.", "Buddhism", "M"]
["These objects are picked up near jamarat during a Muslim ritual. They're not lights, but Joseph Smith used two of them named Urim and Thummim to become a seer and translate the Book of Mormon. Jacob blessed one with the name \"Beth-El\", meaning House of God. Muslims make these objects collide with walls representing the Devil during the hajj, and a black one from heaven is at the most sacred corner of the Ka'aba. Jesus asked \"he who is without sin\" to cast the first one. For 10 points, name these objects whose larger examples were arranged by Neolithic British pagans into a namesake circular \"henge.\"", "Rock (geology)", "M"]
["One legend about this man says that he didn't understand the use of spiders, mosquitoes, or insanity until all three helped save his life; in particular, he was forced to feign madness before Achish, king of Gath. A feud among this man's sons began after his daughter Tamar was raped by her half-brother Amnon, and he survived the rebellion of his long-haired son Absalom. This man had Uriah killed in battle after committing adultery with Bathsheba. This man's closest friend was Jonathan, the son of his predecessor Saul. For 10 points, name this King of Israel who, as a youth, used a stone to defeat Goliath.", "David", "M"]
["This man was born in a year when plague killed every member of an army invading his hometown, including that army's leading elephant. This man rode a winged steed westward to a holy building where he went up and down the seven heavens during the Night Journey, and he established the first protections for People of the Book. At age forty, he started making trips to a cave in Mount Hira. This man's authoritative statements are called hadith, and the archangel Gabriel revealed 114 suras to this \"seal of the prophets\". For 10 points, name this man who fled Mecca after receiving the Qur'an and founding Islam.", "Muhammad", "M"]
["This sole nephew of Penninah spoke at Gilgal after relinquishing power, warning of the dangers of king-worship. He formed an army at Mizpah and led them to a victory, elevating him to leader status until he stepped down in favor of a tall animal-herder. This man sliced Agag the Amalekite into strips, and was born to Elkanah's wife after his mother begged in the Temple for a child who she would devote to God. This man's mother Hannah let Eli raise him. He heard God calling to him in the night at age 13 in his first namesake Old Testament book. For 10 points, name this prophet and final Hebrew judge, who advised Israel's king Saul.", "Samuel", "M"]
["Hamor sought out this man after Hamor's son Shechem raped this man's daughter. This man's concubines included Bilhah and Zilpah, and when he was near the Jabbok river, he had the hollow of his thigh broken. This man was denied a flock of spotted sheep by Laban, for whom this man worked seven extra years to get his desired bride. He put goat skins on his hands to get an undue paternal blessing, got a new name after wrestling an angel, and traded stew for the birthright of his older twin brother Esau. For 10 points, name this Biblical patriarch who fathered Joseph among twelve sons and dreamed of a namesake \"ladder\" to heaven.", "Jacob", "M"]
["The word \"Nirankar\" is used in this religion to convey shapelessness and timelessness. Its adherents believe in an \"inward eye\" which can be trained to see divinity through meditating, and serve communal meals in langar kitchens. This faith's sacred book, which is revered as though it were a personified spiritual leader, must be handled by a Granthi, and its holiest building is the Golden Temple. Its line of ten spiritual founders starts with Nanak. For 10 points, name this monotheistic religion expounded in the Punjab region of south Asia by gurus, which requires many male believers to wear turbans.", "Sikhism", "M"]
[". One text in this set argues that the parting of two men \"for a season\" might serve to join them forever as brothers; that one was written on behalf of Onesimus, an escaped slave. The first of these texts ends chapter 1 by describing sinful sexual acts, then says \"you\u0085have no excuse\" to judge others in chapter 2, and is often cited by sola fide advocates. They include \"Philemon,\" and a later one, which includes the phrases \"we see through a glass darkly\" and \"Love is patient, love is kind,\" went to churchgoing Corinthians. The first of the thirteen was addressed to the Romans. For 10 points, name these letters compiled in the New Testament, written by an apostle from Tarsus.", "Icon corner", "M"]
["This location first appeared after a king did a thousand years of penance for sixty thousand ancestors who were burned to death by a sage's glance. This location is personified by a goddess who rides a makara beast and fell from the sky into another god's hair. Eighty-four entryways to this place called ghats lead from the city of Varanasi to this environmentally-troubled location, where ashes of the cremated dead are borne away and achieve moksha when brought along a sacred pilgrimage. For 10 points, name this source of ritual water, the holiest river for Hindus.", "Ganga Mahal Ghat (I)", "M"]
["A sacred text in this language compares its title concept to a bellows blowing air in the fourth section of Stephen Mitchell's translation. Another writer used it to describe a child falling down a well to exemplify \"Four Sprouts\" or \"Four Beginnings.\" A sacred book in this language includes six types of hexagram in a lookup table used after flipping three coins. A scholar in this language was unsure if he dreamed of being a butterfly or vice-versa. Mencius built on a text in this language which stresses \"five relationships\" and filial piety, called the Analects. For 10 points, name this language used by the divinatory Book of Changes, the earliest Daoists, and Confucius.", "Classical Chinese", "M"]
["In one song sung on this holiday, a butcher kills an ox for drinking water some time after a dog bites a cat who ate the title animal. This holiday, during which \"One Little Goat\" is sung, marks the start of the omer, a seven-week period between it and Shavuot. On the fifteenth of the month Nisan, its starting day, the youngest person present asks the Four Questions. This holiday's English name reflects the mercy of the Angel of Death, and its first two days feature a ritual meal, the Seder. For 10 points, name this eight-day Jewish holiday commemorating the Exodus from Egypt, during which Jewish people eat unleavened matzah.", "Passover", "M"]
["Several servants repeat, \"I am the only one who escaped to tell thee\" to this man; in response, he remarks, \"Naked I came from my mother's womb, and naked will I depart.\" This man is told to \"Brace yourself like a man. I will question you, and you will answer me.\" This man laments, \"May the day of my birth perish\" after he scratches his skin with a shard of pottery. Elihu soliloquizes to this man after he argues with Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar. The wife of this man from Uz tells him to \"Curse God and die.\" He loses seven thousand sheep and three thousand cattle and erupts into sores. For 10 points, name this Biblical character, the subject of a wager between God and Satan.", "Job", "M"]
["Samson asks the Philistines \"out of the eater, something to eat; out of the strong, something sweet\", after spotting bees making honey in the carcass of these animals. These animals are associated with the only tribe of Israel who supported David, not Saul's line, so one appears on Jerusalem's coat of arms. According to the Book of Revelation, the only person worthy to break the Seven Seals is this animal \"of Judah\". After an edict forbidding prayer for thirty days is passed, an angel shuts the mouths of these animals. Darius the Great used his own signet ring to seal off a place home to these animals. For 10 points, name these beasts that did not kill Daniel in their den.", "Lion", "M"]
["A fast in this religion on the thirteenth day of the new month commemorates a certain deity's \"favorite day.\" In one holiday for this religion, sisters tie strings around their brothers' right wrists to protect them from evil. Another festival in this religion commemorates a man who survived being burned alive while sitting on the lap of a woman who couldn't be hurt by fire. Members of this religion light lanterns to celebrate a figure's return from the forest after 17 years. Pujas are celebrated by members of this faith, who throw colored powder on each other during Holi. For 10 points, name this religion which also celebrates a festival of lights called Diwali and venerates Vishnu and Shiva.", "Hinduism", "M"]
["These statements govern the use of a tool called a sakin, also known as a halaf. The shechet is responsible for obeying most of these statements. These statements permit unrestricted use of items known as pareve, and classify items as either milchig or fleishig. One notable example of these statements derives from the commandment, \"Thou shalt not boil a kid in its mother's milk.\" These laws, which are analogous to the labels of halal and haram in Islam, prohibit the consumption of pork, shellfish, and, simultaneously, milk and meat. For 10 points, name these dietary laws of Judaism.", "Kashrut", "M"]
["Usually, this discipline focuses on either two types of foulness called the worm-infested and the hacked, or on ten elements and colors called kasinas. A three-part code of discipline which includes sila and samadhi is central to one type of this practice called Vipassana. The Anapanasati school of this discipline centers on focusing one's breathing. While engaged in this activity, participants experience \"cosmic energy\" by intonating short words called \"mantras,\" such as \"Om.\" For 10 points, name this practice of focusing the mind from the material world, which the Buddha did under a Bodhi tree to reach enlightenment.", "Meditation", "M"]
["Members of this religion throw opele, or sliced-up coconut, in a divinatory rite. The initiation ritual for this religion, called the asiento, involves eleven separate steps. This religion relies on a system of magical divination called ifa. Elegua and Osun are two of the four warriors in this religion, which also venerates Shango, the patron of fire and lightning. The babalawo [pr. BABA-LAO] priest in this religion may use cowrie shells when venerating orishas. This religion, also called Lucumi, fell into controversy in 1993 when the Supreme Court ruled in favor of its practice of animal sacrifice. For 10 points, name this Yoruban-Catholic syncretic religion popular in Cuba.", "Santer\u00eda", "M"]
["Description acceptable. Visitors to these locations can write their wishes onto wooden plaques called ema, which are then hung onto the ceilings. These places are maintained by leaders called kannushi. The larger of the two houses at these locations are called haiden, which are connected by halls to the honden. These sites are usually flanked by two stone lions or dogs called komainu, and can also be guarded by stone foxes if dedicated to Inari. The entrances to these places are marked by tall orange and black torii gates. For 10 points, name these holy places which house the kami of an indigenous Japanese faith.", "Shinto shrine", "M"]
["In the Gospel of Luke, Luke uses the word \"kataphileo\" to describe one instance of this action. During the Hajj, a Muslim may point towards the Black Stone and recite \"In the name of God, God is great\" if they are unable to do this action at the Black Stone of the Kaaba. Whenever entering a room, Jews do this action to the mezuzah. The father of the Prodigal Son did this action to his son upon the son's return. In return for thirty pieces of silver, one person agreed to do this to his master in the Garden of Gethsemane. For 10 points, name this action, the ironic way in which Judas betrayed Jesus.", "Kiss", "H"]
["A meeting that resolved a crisis regarding this doctrine was chaired by Johannes Bogerman. Proponents of this doctrine often cite Romans 9, which discusses the hardening of the Pharaoh. The time at which the subject of this doctrine first occurred is the difference between supralapsarianism and infralapsarianism. Equal ultimacy is a symmetrical form of this doctrine. This doctrine, along with original sin, was the subject of a famous debate between Augustine and Pelagius. A dispute over this doctrine was resolved at the Synod of (*) Dort, where a \"conditional\" form of this doctrine was put forth by Arminius. For 10 points, name this doctrine put forth in Institutes of the Christian Religion by John Calvin which states God has already determined who will be damned and who will be saved.", "Predestination", "H"]
["This text's first line of dialogue, \"Master, why are you laughing over our prayer of thanksgiving?\", occurs at the breaking of bread. This text references the \"generations of the stars,\" and notes that the title figure's \"star\" has led him astray. This text describes the emergence of the \"enlightened divine Self-Generated\" and an evil being called Saklas, to whom fools make sacrifices, from a \"luminous cloud\" which the title character enters near its end. A 2006 translation of this text by Rodolphe (*) Kasser was released decades after its discovery in the Codex Tchacos, verifying the reference to this text by Irenaeus. Its title figure is told \"You will be the thirteenth, and you will be cursed by the other generations.\" For 10 points, name this Coptic language text, a Gnostic dialogue in which Jesus reveals angelic secrets to the title apostle and commands his own betrayal.", "Gospel of Judas", "H"]
["This text contains a simile that claims children of God who free themselves from fault are\"shin[ing] like stars in the universe,\" and it then invites the listeners to \"be glad and rejoice with me.\" It's not Colossians, but the faithful in this work are referred to as \"the circumcision,\" as they \"glory in Christ Jesus, and who put no confidence in the flesh;\" it then invokes the Tribe of Benjamin. The concept of kenosis, or (*) self-emptying of will for want of God's intent, is introduced in this text, containing the line, \"[A]t the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth.\" Claiming that \"I can do all this through Christ who gives me strength,\" the author of this text was aided by Ephaphroditus before bidding him return home with gifts to sacrifice to God. For 10 points, name this book in the New Testament, a Pauline epistle to a church in Macedon.", "Epistle to the Philippians", "H"]
["In this religion's funeral rites, the phul, or so-called \"flowers\" of a cremated body are gathered and dissolved, and a reading of its scriptures is timed to last ten days to console the bereaved. A group of warriors of this religion were named \"mythical sea creatures\" because their fighting resembled that of crocodiles, and participate in a three-day Olympic-like event called \"tactical maneuvers\" this religion deliberately holds one day after a more prominent festival. During wedding ceremonies in this religion, the bride and groom hold onto opposite ends of a scarf and circle around a holy object four times, representing the lavan; that marriage ceremony is literally called\"Blissful Union.\" Temples in this religion have four (*) doors, apocryphally to short-circuit the claim that God lies in the West or the East, and contain communal eating places called langar. In another rite in this religion, celebrants have drops of water put on their hair and eyes and cry, \"Waheguru Ji Ki Fateh!\" in front of the onlooking Panj Piyaras. For 10 points, name this religion whose baptism ritual involves drinking amrit stirred by a double-edged sword and then going on to live by the Five K's.", "Sikhism", "H"]
["In a ritual over a dead one of these creatures, priests say phrases such as \"Hey overseer, hey overseer, your mother and father play in the top of a tree\" and \"Hey invoker, hey invoker, when the gods see that miserable penis\u0085\" during a full night of holy insults. One of these creatures which disappeared into the Furat river to mark the death of Husayn was named Zuljanah. In ancient Rome, the head of one of these creatures was decorated with bread and devoted to Mars after being severed on the Ides of October. This animal is the primary metaphor for a Santer\u00eda priest inhabited by an orisha during (*) trance possession. These animals were paraded around the world for a year before symbolically copulating with an Indo-Aryan queen. The healing of a paralyzed black one of these animals led Vishtaspa to convert to Zoroastrianism. For 10 points, name these animals sacrificed in the ashvamedha ritual described in the Vedas, a red example of which is ridden by War in the Book of Revelation.", "Horse", "H"]
["Egerius Baebus made Mount Tifata sacred to this deity, for whom Servius Tullius built a temple on the Aventine Hill. A child about to be sacrificed in Horace's Epode 5 invokes Nox and this deity, who transforms all of Meleager's sisters except for Gorge and Deianira into guinea hens in the Metamorphoses. In the Aeneid, this deity sends Opis down to slay Arruns. After the death of Numa Pompilius, this goddess turned the weeping (*) Egeria into a spring. She was part of a triad along with Egeria and the resurrected Virbius. Along with Juno Lucina, she provided aid for mothers in childbirth, votive offerings for which were found at her most famous ritual site, located near the Lake of Nemi. The daughter of Latona, she was the patron goddess of the King of the Wood. For 10 points, identify this Roman goddess of the moon, nature, and the hunt.", "Diana", "H"]
["In one story, Hadrian's nephew Onkelos prevented some Roman guards from killing him by kissing one of these objects and explaining its meaning. This object displays a Caesar cipher such that, when each letter is replaced with the previous letter of the alphabet, it reads \"The Lord, God, the Lord.\" A ritual involving this object is to touch it and then kiss the fingers one used to touch it. Among the Samaritans, this kind of object was a large stone slab. This object is often used in the Chanukat HaBayit ritual. Rashi and Jacob Tam disagreed over whether this object should be (*) oriented horizontally or vertically, so it is usually set at a diagonal; it is also inset with the letter shin. The text of the Shema, along with part of Deuteronomy 11, is written on a piece of parchment held in this type of object. For 10 points, name these scroll-containing items affixed to the doorposts of Jewish households.", "Mezuzah", "H"]
["This book's prophecy that \"the Lord is coming with thousands upon thousands of his holy ones\" is quoted by the Epistle of Jude. Noah appears as a white bull in this book's animal-based allegory of Israel's history. The \"secrets of lightning\" are revealed in a section of this book that describes a vision of the \"Elect One\" in a multitude before the \"Head of Days\" and \"Lord of Spirits.\" Another section of this book forms the basis of a solar calendar used at Qumran. In the first section of this book, (*) Azazel teaches metalworking to mankind and joins other fallen angels led by Samyaza to impregnate mortal women and produce the Nephilim. This book, only fully extant in the Ge'ez language of Ethiopia, often addresses the title character's son Methuselah. For 10 points, name this apocryphal book that includes the Astronomical Book, Book of Dream Visions and Book of the Watchers, attributed to a great-grandfather of Noah who walked with God.", "Mount Hermon", "H"]
["The sayings of one group of these people were gathered into a collection around 450 C.E. under the name Apophthegma Patrum. In Islamic tradition, these people lived in dwellings called rabitah, and al-Arabi gives an example of one of these people named Abu Yahya al-Sunhaji. Sulpicius Severus wrote a noted biography of one of these people, Martin of Tours, who was instrumental in expanding the numbers of these people in Gaul in the 4th century C.E., while a noted British member of this group wrote a book called (*) Revelations of Divine Love. Basil of Caesarea led one of the few reactions against these people in Eastern Christianity, where they are most prominent, and most early Christian examples of these people were named after tax evaders. Exemplified by such people as Simeon, who to avoid people seeking his prayers spent his time sitting on a pillar, as well as Julian of Norwich and St. Anthony, for 10 points, identify these people sometimes called \"anchorites,\" who engage in religious contemplation by isolating themselves from the world.", "Hermit", "H"]
["One of these texts describes darkness as a snake before it becomes \"Moist Nature\" which \"belch[es] out smoke.\" Another one discusses how the \"Better One\" supplied a string to fix a musician's broken instrument and is titled \"The Encomium of Kings.\" Including one about Poimandres, the shepherd of men, these eighteen tracts have been translated by G. R. S. Mead. These texts include addresses to the author's disciples (*) Tat, Ammon and Asclepius. The most famous member of these texts lists principles like \"The Sun is its father, the moon its mother\" and \"That which is below is like that which is above\" and is called the Smaragdine Table, or Emerald Tablet. For 10 points, name these mysterious wisdom texts about subjects like alchemy, attributed to a divinity with the epithet \"Trismegistus.\"", "Herm\u00e9tica", "H"]
["A member of this sect, Gaudentius, reportedly threatened to burn down his church and his followers rather than surrender it. Extremists linked to it included peasants who would randomly beat travelers with clubs while screaming \"Praise the Lord!\" called \"Circumcellions.\" This sect condemned the actions of Mensurius, who tried to defend himself in a letter to Secundus. Its namesake and his beliefs were officially condemned at the first Council of (*) Arles, which upheld the election of Caecilian. This sect was formed out of enmity towards traditores, Christians who had handed over Scriptures to the governor during Diocletian's persecutions. Holding that sacraments administered by sinning bishops were invalid, it took its name from a Berber Christian bishop of Carthage. For 10 points, name this Christian sect formed out of a fourth and fifth century schism and located in North Africa", "Donatism", "H"]
["Psalm 1 compares a righteous man to one of these objects. In the Book of Judges, Jotham tells a story in which these things decide on their king to criticize the Shechemites' choice of Abimelech. King Nebuchadnezzar has a dream about one of these objects that Daniel interprets to mean Nebuchadnezzar will eat grass. In Luke, Jesus asks to stay at the house of the tax collector who used one of these to see him, (*) Zacchaeus. This kind of object appears on both sides of the River of Life near the end of the Book of Revelation. Jesus compared his words about another of these items to a command for a mountain to throw itself into the sea; while hungry, Jesus cursed that one for not giving him food. For 10 points, name this type of of living organism that bore the knowledge of good and evil in the Garden of Eden.", "Tree", "H"]
["According to one of this religion's texts, its founder had a mysterious twin who revealed a secret revelation at the age of twenty-five. The phrase \"on the origin of his body\" titled that text, which is known to modern scholars as the \"Cologne Codex.\" Albert von le Coq's German Turfan expedition uncovered paintings by followers of this religion, as well as some of their texts, which used a writing system called the \"Estrangelo.\" One of its texts was a book supposedly painted in a cave and present in a library at Ghazni as late as the eleventh century; that text was the (*) Arzhang. Mou-Yu made this religion the official belief of the Uighurs, though it was prohibited in Tang China. Divided between the devout \"Elect\" and the less-devoted \"Hearers,\" this religion holds that a primordial \"World of Light\" preceded creation. For 10 points, a third-century CE Persian prophet founded what religion, whose name still indicates a system of dualistic extremes?", "Manichaeism", "H"]
["Members of this sect have to agree to Ten Conditions in an initiation ceremony called bai'at. The Qadiani Jamaat branch of this sect is active in the United States, and its first missionary, Mufti Muhammad Sadiq, started the publication Muslim Sunrise. The Jalsa Salana is the annual gathering of members of this sect. The founder of this sect gave a lecture in Sialkot claiming that (*) Krishna was a prophet of God that had been corrupted over time into an avatar. It also believes that Jesus survived his crucifixion and preached in Kashmir. Adherents call the founder of this movement al-Masih because they believe him to be the 13th Mujaddid, who received a divine revelation from Allah revealing him as the Mahdi. For 10 points, name this oft-persecuted Islamist sect, founded by Hazrat Mirza Ghulam, with a major presence in Pakistan.", "Ahmadiyya", "H"]
["This text contains a row of eight verbs of adoration in the reflexive hitpael conjugation. This text's opening words derive from Ezekiel 38:23, in which God speaks of magnifying himself. The word \"Titkabel\" appears in the longest version of this text, and many versions, including the \"Rabbi's\" version, contain a section beginning \"Y'hey shlama rabba min shemaya.\" Sections of a prayer service are divided by the (*) \"Hatzi,\" or \"half\" form, of this largely-Aramaic text, whose name uses the same root as a prayer sanctifying Sabbath wine. This prayer begins with the line \"Yitgadal v'yitkadash sh'me raba.\" It is also said over a candle at Yahrzeit anniversaries at yearly intervals. For 10 points, name this Jewish prayer whose \"Mourner's\" variant is done in honor of the dead.", "Kaddish", "H"]
["Blindfolded neophytes throw a flower onto one of these objects before taking a ritual bath in the Kechien Kanjo ritual. The two major types of these objects, corresponding to the \"womb world\" and \"thunderbolt world,\" are garbadhatu and vajradhatu. Metal funnels called chakpurs are used to create some of these objects that are ritualistically destroyed soon after completion. The ten books of the (*) Rig Veda are named for these objects, which are often made out of colored sand in Tibet. Their design helped inspire Carl Jung's theory of the unconscious, and they consist of concentric triangles, squares, and circles. For 10 points, name these circular diagrams that represent the universe in Hinduism and Buddhism.", "Mandala", "H"]
["The end of this section of religious text notes that even if the whole sea were turned to ink and doubled, the words of God couldn't all be written with it. Stories in this segment include an man who brags to his equally-wealthy neighbor before losing his garden of grapes and date palms, and a dog that stretches its forelegs as several youths are turned left and right in their sleep. This segment's namesake locale is inhabited for 309 years by people sometimes equated to the Seven Sleepers of Ephesus, and it also features the building of a wall to keep out (*) Gog and Magog by Dhul-Qarnayn, who is sometimes identified with Alexander the Great. This 110-ayah segment comes immediately before a sura describing fresh dates that drop during Jesus's birth, called \"Maryam.\" For 10 points, name this section of the Qur'an, in which young monotheistic men seek refuge from persecution in the namesake natural locale.", "Red Jews", "H"]
["In Islam, Muhammad claimed that this man's wife Asiya will enter Jannah first among women, joining Mary, Khadijah, and Fatima among the four most pious women of history. Puah and Shiphrah defied this man by working \"upon the stools.\" In Judaic midrash, this man has a daughter named Bithiah. The theft of an item belonging to this man led to a test under his roof involving a bar of gold and a burning-hot (*) coal picked up by a baby. This man is warned of the \"finger of God,\" and New Testament descriptions of \"hearts\" being \"hardened\" derive from this Old Testament figure's narrative. This man presided over Goshen before the father of Gershom confronted him. For 10 points, name this ruler who dealt with a frog outbreak during the Ten Plagues.", "Pharaohs in the Bible", "E"]
["This man's brothers were Nahor and Haran, and his father was Terah. He told his wife to say that she was his sister to evade Egyptian guards. This man fathered Ishmael with Hagar, but he is more famous for nearly (*) sacrificing his son, Isaac. For 10 points, name this Old Testament figure whose wife was Sarah and who made a covenant with God, making him a patriarchal figure in Islam, Christianity, and Judaism.", "Abraham", "E"]
["This substance, along with milk, is a symbol of fertility in Hinduism. It's not fire, but it has a namesake temple in Zoroastrianism, and Shintoism describes an island that is made from this substance. In Roman Catholicism, this substance is paired with chrism in its most famous use, and Jesus used it to (*) wash the Apostles' feet. For ten points, name this substance that John the Baptist used for baptism in the Jordan River.", "Water", "E"]
["The practice of kapparot associated with this holiday sees a donation to the poor, while the Tetragrammaton or Ha-Shem was pronounced by the High Priest of the Great Temple on this day. The last of the five services occurring on this day is the Neilah. People try to transfer their sins away and recite the Kol Nidre prayer before its beginning. Occurring on the 10th of Tishrei, it concludes the (*) High Holy Days. For 10 points, name this Jewish Day of Atonement.", "Yom Kippur", "E"]
["Martin Luther wrote that people should let these be strong, but that their trust in Christ should be stronger. They can be divided into types of commission and omission, and they can be classified as grave or (*) mortal if they have serious matter, full knowledge, and full consent. For 10 points, name these offenses against God's will, of which there are seven \"deadly\" ones.", "Sin", "E"]
["One figure in this religion wears three wedding bands to symbolize her marriages to Agwe, Dumballah, and Ogoun. In addition to Erzulie, one figure in this religion is represented by a cross over a tomb and is named Ghede. Gods in this religion are called \"loa\" and this religion's god of the Earth is named Papa Legba.(*) For 10 points, name this religion that originated in Haiti, famous for its namesake dolls.", "Voodoo", "E"]
["Other than James and John, this is the only man to witness the Transfiguration of Jesus. He cut off the guard Malchus's ear during a showdown in the Garden of Gethsemane. His symbol is a pair of crossed (*) keys, and this man is said to have been crucified upside down. For 10 points, name this apostle of Jesus and brother of Andrew, who denied Jesus three times and was the first pope.", "Saint Peter", "E"]
["Some of the most important teachings of this religion include the Four Noble Truths and the Middle Way. One of the main branches of this religion is also known as the \"School of Elders,\" while another is known as the \"Great Vehicle.\" Those are the Theravada and Mahayana branches of this religion. (*) Siddhartha Gautama founded, for 10 points, what religion that also comes in Zen and Tibetan forms?", "Buddhism", "M"]
["One ancient ritual on this day involved tying a red band around the horns of a goat and leading it off a cliff. It was the only day that the Kohen Gadol could enter the Holy of Holies. The traditional greeting on the eve of this holiday is \"Tzom kal.\" This holiday, whose five prohibitions include wearing leather shoes and having sex, is bookended by the \"Kol Nidre\" and \"Nei'la\" prayers. This holiday occurs on the tenth of Tishrei, nine days after Rosh Hashanah. For 10 points, Jews fast for 25 hours on what Day of Atonement?", "Yom Kippur", "M"]
["Deities in this religion, which include conjoined twins known as the Marassa, are divided into 21 nations, including Rada and Petwo. Among its clergy are magicians-for-hire called bokors, priests called houngans, and priestesses called mambos. Members of this religion pray to saint-like spirits such as Papa Legba who are known as loa, intermediaries between humans and the supreme god Bondye. For 10 points, name this syncretic Haitian religion whose actual religious practices typically don't involve raising zombies or sticking pins into dolls.", "Voodoo", "M"]
["This man's namesake book of the Bible contains the parable of the weeds. The relics of this man, whose feast day is September 21, are housed at the Salerno Cathedral. This saint hosted a meal that many sinners attended, which Jesus defended by arguing that \"I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.\" He was originally called Levi before being given a name meaning \"gift of Yahweh\" when he quit working for Herod Antipas to be an apostle. For 10 points, what onetime tax collector is the namesake of the first Gospel?", "Matthew the Apostle", "M"]
["Many homes in this country contain an altar that houses an ihai to commemorate deceased family members. \"God-shelves\" are found in this country, where the Tendai sect of Buddhism is practiced. Shingon, meaning \"true word,\" is a branch of Vajrayana Buddhism in this country. Nichiren is the namesake of a religious sect in this country and believed he was a bodhisattva. Another sect popular in this country seeks satori and contemplates riddles known as koans. For 10 points, name this country where Zen Buddhism is popular.", "Japan", "M"]
["This figure opened a war with the Byzantine Empire at the Battle of Tabouk and defeated a siege at the Battle of the Trench. After a night journey on a mule with wings attached to its thighs, this figure chose to drink milk instead of water or wine. This man was told to \"read\" on the Night of Power in the cave Hira. This man, who married the merchant Khadija, had his sayings collected as the Hadith. After the Hijra, this man's new home of Yathrib became known as Medina. For 10 points, the angel Gabriel revealed the Quran to what prophet of Islam?", "", "M"]
["St. Augustine converted to Christianity from a religion founded in this nation. A religion founded in this nation is now governed from Israel's Universal House of Justice. This nation was home to the author of the Epistle to the Son of the Wolf, a follower of the B\u00e1b. One service in a religion from this nation, the Ab-Zohr, is conducted during a recitation of the Yasna, part of the Avesta. A faith from this nation centers on the opposition of Angra Mainyu and Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this nation, the founding place of Manichaeism, Bah\u00e1'i, and Zoroastrianism.", "Iran", "M"]
["In this religion's cosmology, the universe is wide at the top and the bottom and narrow in the middle, just like a human body. This religion's legendary founder was born at the end of the third epoch of a descending time cycle and lived for about 593 quintillion years. That man, Rishabha, was the first of the 24 of this religion's \"ford-bearers,\" the last of whom was Mahavira. For 10 points, name the Indian religion whose \"sky-clad\" monks do not wear clothing and whose followers practice a very strict form of non-violence called ahimsa.", "Jainism", "M"]
["The only living person to hold this title is Aga Khan IV, who belongs to the Nizari dynasty. The Mourning of Muharram commemorates the death of a holder of this title at the Battle of Karbala. One holder of this title underwent the Occultation and will eventually reappear accompanied by Jesus. That man is referred to as \"the Mahdi\" by members of the Twelver sect, whose name derives from their belief that there were twelve holders of this title. For 10 points, Shia Muslims use what title to refer to the divinely appointed successors of Muhammad?", "Imamah (Shia doctrine)", "M"]
["This practice is the final step of wudu, which must be performed prior to salah. Chapter 13 of the Book of John is the scriptural basis for this practice in Christianity. On March 28, 2013, Pope Francis became the first pope to perform this action on a woman. One example of this action was initially refused by Saint Peter and is commemorated on Maundy Thursday. For 10 points, name the action done by Jesus to the Apostles following the Last Supper that is performed by hand using a basin of water in order to purify a certain area of the body.", "Foot washing", "M"]
["The wearing of Tefillin usually begins after this ritual, though some Orthodox sects insist on practicing it up to three months prior. This ritual usually presents the initiate with his first effort at aliyah. A tzedekah, or act of charity, is often expected of those preparing for this ritual. Gifts of savings bonds or gift cards in multiples of 18 dollars are often given, as that number is considered lucky. It signifies the initiate's responsibility to follow Halakha, or religious law, and gives him the right to read publicly from the Torah. FTP what is this coming-of-age ritual for boys in Judaism?", "Bar and Bat Mitzvah", "H"]
["One of these documents warns that if a fly lands in your drink, one of the wings is poison and the other contains the cure. A number of these documents state that eclipses are not caused by the death of someone and that whenever they occur, men should continuously pray. One of these texts warns that Jews will hide behind trees and rocks, but that the trees and rocks will give (*) away their location, and that Judgment Day will not come until the Jews are killed. Unreliable ones are often classified as 'Daif,' or 'weak.' The most trusted collections of these documents include the Muwatta and the Sahih al-Bukari, and they are second only to the Quran in their authority as religious law. For 10 points, identify these collected sayings of the Prophet Muhammad.", "Hadith", "H"]
["This action is the defining practice of the Soshigateli sect of Russian Old Believers. The twenty-third chapter of the Lotus Sutra recounts that the Medicine King did this after swallowing various items for twelve hundred years. Gayatri Spivak's \"Can the Subaltern Speak?\" closes by stating that the British misunderstood this practice. The (*) Falun Gong have repeatedly denied that five of their practitioners did this in Tianamen Square in 2001. A wave of this practice was launched by Buddhist monks in South Vietnam, starting with Thich Quang Duc. Indian women would sometimes do this after their husband's death, a practice known as Sati. For 10 points, identify this common form of religious suicide.", "Self-immolation", "H"]
["In one text, this saint sings the \"Hymn of the Pearl,\" and in another, he recovers the girdle of the Virgin Mary when she drops it while ascending to heaven. A text named for this man begins \"Whoever discovers the interpretation of these sayings will not taste death.\" Along with Barbara, he is the patron saint of architecture. Marco Polo claimed that this man actually died by a man who couldn't throw an arrow while he was at Chennai; other sources state that he died in Edessa. This man's eponymous (*) gnostic gospel consists of 114 sayings of Jesus, and according to the Gospel of John, this saint requested to thrust his hand into Jesus's side. For 10 points, name this apostle who spread Christianity to India and doubted that Jesus was actually resurrected.", "Thomas the Apostle", "H"]
["In one prayer from this faith, the speaker proclaims \"I bow down to those who have reached omniscience in the flesh.\" This faith's cosmology postulates the existence of beings with only the sense of touch called nigodas. In 1974, this faith adopted an official emblem which contains three dots near the top and an additional dot inside a curve, representing an (*) enlightened soul. The largest schism within this faith partially sprang from a dispute over whether it was possible for a woman to achieve salvation. Lay members of this faith follow twelve vows, divided into the Anuvratas, Gunavratas, and Siksavratas, while monks within this faith are divided into the \"white-clad\" and \"sky-clad\" sects. For 10 points, name this Indian faith based on the teachings of the Tirthankaras.", "Jainism", "H"]
["In this work, one of the lead characters has dream where he is haunted by spirits of Johnnie Cochran, Genghis Khan, Adolf Hitler, and dancing cups of coffee as the devil plays the guitar. Another character constantly complains about having maggots in his scrotum. Its two lead characters join the natives in the singing of \"Hasa Diga Eebowai\" after having their bags stolen by the soldiers of (*) General-Butt-Fucking-Naked but soon stop once they realize that they're singing \"Fuck you God.\" As it opens, Elder Cunningham is accused of \"making things up again\" after he says \"Would you like to change religions? I have a book written by Jesus!\" For 10 points, name this Matt Stone and Trey Parker musical about a religion founded by Joseph Smith.", "Book of Mormon", "H"]
["Carlos Castaneda described knowledge gleaned from these figures in the books The Teachings of Don Juan and The Wheel of Time. According to the cosmogony of the Yakuts, the first one of these figures descended from a two-headed eagle and was a child of Ai. More typically, one of these figures would cut notches into the wood of a yurt to ensure a prosperous marriage for a new couple. A hunter who is devoured by polar bears can (*) become one of these figures, which in Inuit culture is called an angakkuq. Typically, they venture through the cosmic order to retrieve an object from the afterlife that is needed for a man in their plane of existence. For 10 points, name these medicine men who are revered as spiritualists in some religions.", "Shamanism", "H"]
["One man who was a member of this sect authored three \"Farmer's Letters\" and authored The Congress Canvassed. This sect includes William White, who brought this movement to Pennsylvania and the first man to promulgate its ideas refused to take the Oath of Allegiance and was named Samuel Seabury. The General Convention of this sect is composed of a House of Bishops and a House of Deputies. This sect formally disaffiliated itself from (*) Mark Lawrence in 2012, continuing a trend of liberalization which has included the election of Katharine Jefferts Schori as primate. This sect aroused controversy by electing the openly gay Gene Robinson as Bishop of the diocese of New Hampshire. For 10 points, name this American branch of the Anglican Communion.", "Episcopal Church (United States)", "H"]
["One passage of this book describes a man with a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet, and claims that all creatures are one fourth of him. This book claims that there was once neither being nor non-being, and that only he in the highest heaven knows how the world was created, \"but then, perhaps, he knows not,\" in a section that asks \"What covered it?\" \"Where was it?\" and \"Was there cosmic (*) water?\" That passage is called the \"Nasadiya Sutka.\" Another part of this book describes how the cosmic man Purusha was sacrificed by the gods to create the four castes. The Aitareya Brahmana provides commentary on this book, which opens with an invocation of Agni. For 10 points, name this book of hymns, the oldest of the four Vedas.", "Rigveda", "H"]
["One religion from this country espouses the four pillars of suicide, abortion, cannibalism of the deceased, and sodomy. Another faith from this country postulates the existence of a \"time track\" which records an individual's experiences and distributes the information among the analytical mind and the reactive mind, the latter of which is responsible for negative thoughts. Another sect from this country holds annual (*) \"Circuit Assemblies,\" and publishes the illustrated magazine Awake! This home of Church of Euthanasia is also home to a sect founded by Charles Taze Russell as well as one that claims that the world is plagued by thetans released by Lord Xenu. For 10 points, name this home country of Jehovah's Witnesses and the Church of Scientology.", "United States", "H"]
["As an old man, this figure asked \"Whose ox have I taken, or whose ass have I taken?\", to which his audience replied that he had stolen nothing. He studied alongside Hophni and Phinehas and mistook the voice of God for that of their father. When this figure failed to arrive at Gilgal on time, another man took it upon himself to offer a (*) burnt offering, and that man later contacted the ghost of this figure through the Witch of Endor. This student of Eli and son of Elkanah was conceived when his mother Hannah promised to give her child to the service of God. For 10 points, name this prophet who anointed Saul and David as kings of Israel, and lends his name to the two books chronicling their lives.", "Samuel", "H"]
["This faith practices a funeral ritual in which the spine is broken and the body is chopped up with knives, and one of its sacred texts was first translated by Walter Evans-Wentz. One school within this sect has a name meaning \"Gray Earth.\" This sect, which practices 'sky burial,' inspired Timothy Leary to write The Psychedelic Experience. A text from this faith is designed to guide the soul through the bardo. Another ritual in this sect is the construction and (*) destruction of a pattern of colored sand. It is not from Egypt but it conducts funerals using The Book of the Dead. The de facto leader of this faith has insisted that he will be reincarnated in exile, away from areas under Chinese control. For 10 points, name this religion practiced by Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama.", "Tibetan Buddhism", "H"]
["One theologian from what is now this country described the experience of baqa in his book The Jewels of Wisdom and argued that the soul disappears through an act of fana in The Meccan Revolutions. Another Islamic theologian from here argued that the universe is eternal in his refutation of al-Ghazali, The Incoherence of the Incoherence. This country, which was the birthplace of (*) ibn al-'Arabi and ibn Rushd, is home to a mosque with red and white voussoirs in its arcade. A palatial complex in this country is home to such features as the \"Court of the Myrtles\" and the \"Court of the Lions.\" Moriscos were Muslims in this country who were expelled during the Reconquista. For 10 points, name this country, where one can find Seville and Cordoba", "Spain", "H"]
["The book De Vita Contemplativa describes members of this religion that lived nearby Lake Maroetis called the Therapeutae. Two ancient sects of this religion, which take their name from a word meaning \"to set apart\" and a high priest, differed in doctrine as to whether spilt water was unclean and whether the dead were resurrected. One theologian of this religious movement argued that the Logos was the creative will of God. One sect of this religion employed \"dagger-men\" called the (*) sicarii. Philo of Alexandria sought to unify this religious tradition with ancient Greek philosophy. Sects of this religion include the Essenes, the Sadducees and the Pharisees. For 10 points, name this religious tradition whose clergy includes rabbis.", "Judaism", "H"]
["This man's seed is currently stored at Lake Hamun, where it is guarded by a line of 99,999 spirits that ensure its use in impregnating the virgin mother of the Savior. The marriage of Pouruchista, this man's third daughter, is described in the Vahishto-Ishti text. Medieval sources state that he died at Balkh when he was murdered by Turanians during a Holy War. This son of (*) Poroschasp preached to his wife Hvovi and King Vishtaspa about a struggle between asha and druj, two concepts that are often translated as Truth and The Lie. He is the attributed author of the Gathas, which state that the evil god Ahriman opposes the good god Ahuramazda. For 10 points, name this Persian founder of a monotheistic religion.", "Zoroaster", "H"]
["This religious idea was first introduced in John of Sacrobosco's On the Sphere of the World, and Samuel Clark argued against this theory in a much-publicized debate with Leibniz. Edward Dolnick recently wrote a book on this religious analogy, which William Paley used to explain the purpose of animal wings, antennae and other features. A book titled after this religious idea uses the example of a biomorph which is analogous to a form of human life. Isaac Newton argued that this (*) metaphor was not supported by his theory of universal gravitation. A variant of this analogy titles a book on evolution by Richard Dawkins. For 10 points, name this analogy promulgated by Deists, which compares our world to a mechanistic device set in motion by the creator.", "History of timekeeping devices", "H"]
["The writing style of this book was investigated by J.C. Doderlein and J.G. Eichhorn, and their work was extended by Bernhard Duhm. This book claims that \"the desert will rejoice and bloom like a rose,\" and it emphasizes the suffering of one who will \"bring justice to the nations\" in one of four passages known as the \"Servant Songs.\" It's not Matthew, but this book is the original source of the verse \"The (*) Virgin will conceive and give birth to a son, and will call him Immanuel.\" The author of this book is traditionally identified as the son of Amoz; however, modern scholarship believes that he only wrote the first 39 chapters and that this book is actually the work of two or three different authors. For 10 points, name this longest of the prophetic books of the Hebrew Bible.", "Book of Isaiah", "M"]
["This book describes a rope of palm-fibre wrapping around a woman's neck in an invective against her husband nicknamed \"the Flame.\" Mary is mentioned 34 times within this book, including a section titled after her. A verse describing how God's throne extends over all the universe appears in this book's longest section (*) \"The Cow.\" One figure in this book is magically taken to Jerusalem during the Night Journey, and it contains 114 approximate chapters called suras. Hadiths are not found in this text, but were spoken by the same prophet who \"recited\" this text. For 10 points, the Archangel Gabriel revealed to Muhammed what holy book of Islam?", "Quran", "M"]
["The Eastern Orthodox church divides this book of the Bible into twenty kathismas, and some sections of this book contain acrostics, in which each verse begins with a different letter. One section of this book was written after a man escaped from King Abimelech by pretending to be insane; that man is credited with writing half of this book, including one part for his son (*) Solomon. The most famous part of this book speaks of walking through \"the valley of the shadow of death\" and declares that \"thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.\" For 10 points, name this Biblical book of 150 poems, the 23rd of which is credited to David and declares that \"The Lord is my shepherd.\"", "Psalms", "M"]
["Alternate names for this holiday include Yom Hatzikaron, Yom Hadin, and Yom Truah. It marks the beginning of the days of return, or teshuvah, which are concluded ten days later by the Sabbath of Complete Rest. Some people observe tashlich on this day by throwing bread crumbs into a river or stream, and a traditional dish served on this holiday is carrot tzimmes. Celebrated on the first of the month of (*) Tishre, this holiday features the blowing of the shofar, and the eating of apples and honey in hopes of a sweet new year. For 10 points, give the name of the Jewish new year, the first of the High Holidays that are completed by Yom Kippur.", "Rosh Hashanah", "M"]
["This man was baptized by Ananias of Damascus, and in one of his writings he says to \"put on the full armor of God\" to guard against the Devil. This man traveled extensively with Barnabas, and he wrote one well-known work with (*) \"Timothy our brother.\" In that work, he notes that without love, he is like a \"noisy gong\" or a \"crashing cymbal.\" This author of Ephesians and 1 Corinthians was responsible for holding the coats of those who stoned Saint Stephen. This man converted to Christianity after he was struck blind by God on the road to Damascus. For 10 points, name this biblical figure previously named Saul who wrote many epistles.", "Paul", "M"]
["One of this faith's members summarized its principles in the Tablet to the Hague. A symbol of this religion is the Ringstone. Four goals of this religion were developed in the Ten Year Crusade, and one of its leaders eulogized two brothers and attacked a critical cleric in the Epistle to the Son of the Wolf. This religion's only Guardian was (*) Shoghi Effendi. Jesus and the Bab were among the Manifestations of God in this religion whose holy text, the Book of Certitude, was written by Baha'u'llah. For 10 points, name this Persian religion centered in the Universal House of Justice in Haifa.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["At the end of one of these works, an improperly dressed guest is bound and thrown out of a wedding, and another of these tells of a rich farmer who greedily plans to build bigger barns to hold his plentiful harvest. One of these works tells of how some lamp bearers at a wedding brought sufficient oil while others did not. Thanks is given for the return of a (*) wasteful child in one of these stories, and another likens the growth of mustard seed to the Kingdom of Heaven. A man of a certain ethnicity helps an injured traveler in the one of these about the Good Samaritan. For 10 points, identify these stories used by Jesus to convey messages.", "Parables of Jesus", "M"]
["One holiday from this country began after a poet drowned himself in a river and involves the eating of a food bound in leaves and wrapped with string. The graves of ancestors are visited in early April during the Clear and Bright Festival of this country. This country often employs lanterns and the color (*) red in its celebrations. Cakes named after a celestial body are eaten during lunar holidays of this country from which dragon boat races originate. This country's most prominent holiday involves the giving out of red bags of money. That holiday is the New Year of, for 10 points, what country with a twelve animal zodiac?", "China", "M"]
["Aside from Song of Songs, this is the only biblical book which does not mention God. In this book, Zeresh's husband tries to reward the man who thwarted Bigthana and Teresh by constructing a gallows fifty cubits high. At the beginning of this book, (*) Vashti refuses to appear at a banquet naked. When the name of one character in this book is said, Jews boo and shake groggers to drown it out; that man is the wicked advisor Haman. The title character of this book is selected to marry Ahasuerus and is helped by her uncle Mordechai. For ten points, name this book, sometimes called the Megillah, which is read on Purim.", "Book of Esther", "M"]
["This man's feet are smaller than they should be in a foreshortened depiction of him by Andrea Mantegna. In another painting, a semi-circular slab above a window behind him appears to give him a halo as he sits next to a blue-sleeved man with index finger pointed upwards. This figure's death is shown in 4 dimensions in Dali's Corpus Hypercubus, and in a Rubens painting, incredibly (*) muscular men attempt to lift this man while he is attached to another object. For ten points, identify this long-haired man who appears often in artwork like the Pieta, where his body is held by his mother, the Virgin Mary.", "Jesus", "M"]
["Gifts called zawadi are given on this holiday's final day, and libations are poured from a \"Unity Cup\" on its penultimate day, during the ritual of tambiko. This holiday's Nguzu Saba, or Seven Principles, include imani and kuumba, meaning faith and creativity, respectively, and the (*) seven-branched kinara is used during it. This holiday was created in 1966 by Maulana Karenga, and includes the lighting of three red, three green, and one black candle. For ten points, identify this week-long holiday in late December, which celebrates African-American culture.", "Kwanzaa", "M"]
["In Haitian Vodou, this event includes a ceremony called the Dessunin, in which the mait-tete of a person is removed, and in Hinduism, this event often takes place in a Shmashana, which is usually located by a river. In Judaism, a person performs shemira prior to this event, at which people doing k'riah tear their clothes, and a Kaddish prayer is said. In India, some wives would perform (*) sati and immolate themselves during this ceremony. According to Islamic tradition, a person's head should be facing Mecca after it, and those attending this event should pour out three handfuls of soil. For ten points, identify these ceremonies, in which a deceased person is mourned and buried.", "Funeral", "M"]
["The Pishon and Gihon rivers rise in this region, and one figure born here can possess women through mirrors. After the coming of the Messiah, wicked souls will pass through Gehenna before eventually arriving here, and the entrance to it is guarded by a flaming sword. According to Joseph Smith, this location is in Jackson County, Missouri. Two figures who lived here wore (*) fig leaves to cover their nakedness and were forced to leave after eating from the Tree of Knowledge. For ten points, identify this biblical garden which Adam and Eve were cast out of.", "Garden of Eden", "M"]
["Prior to this event, the census of Quirinius forced everyone to return to their ancestral homes. After his emissaries failed to report back after this event, a king ordered the death of all infant boys in a certain city under the age of two in the Massacre of the Innocents. Kings from the east were sent by Herod to investigate this event, the central figure of which received gifts of gold, (*) frankincense, and myrrh. The three wise men gave those gifts in a manger, since all the inns in Bethlehem were already filled when Joseph and the Virgin Mary arrived. For ten points, identify this event that is celebrated by nativity scenes on Christmas.", "Nativity of Jesus", "M"]
["The Samyaksam variety of these individuals pass on their teachings, unlike the Partyeka ones. One of these figures known as \"of infinite light\" is named Amitabha and is worshipped by the Pure Land sect of a certain religion. Sculptures of two of them carved into the sides of cliffs in (*) Afghanistan's Bamyan Valley were destroyed by the Taliban. Maitreya will be the next one of these figures, according to Theravada and Mahayana believers. For ten points, identify this title meaning \"enlightened one,\" most famously given to Siddhartha Guatama.", "Buddhahood", "M"]
["One camel can be sacrificed for seven people during one part of this event, participants in which put on the ihram at a miqat, and this event is contrasted with the \"lesser\" Umrah. People participating in it stand vigil on the plains near Mount Arafat the day after drinking from the Well of Zamzam but before a ritual \"stoning of the devil\". This occasion's Tawaf requires (*) circling the black stone Kaaba, and it must be done once during the lifetime of any able-bodied adherent. For ten points, identify this pillar of Islam which consists of a pilgrimage to Mecca.", "Hajj", "M"]
["Muhammad convinced Addas to convert to Islam by mentioning this man, whose namesake book alternates between calling a certain figure the male dag and female dagah. A worm causes a plant that this son of Amittai was sheltering under to wither, and this figure's namesake book is sometimes read on Yom Kippur. In Matthew, Jesus compares his resurrection after three days to an exploit of this figure, who tried to (*) flee to Tarshish instead of preaching God's word to Nineveh. For ten points, identify this figure who, after being thrown overboard by sailors in a great storm, was swallowed by a giant fish.", "Jonah", "M"]
["THe Auspicious Events of this religion include the Kevalgyan Kalyanaka, in which a certain figure delivers a speech from the Samavasarana. Nirjara, the act of destroying karmas, is one of the nine tattvas of this religion, which encourages its followers to pursue the Five Vows. It can be split into Svetambara and Digambara sects, the latter of which practices nudity and is known as (*) \"sky-clad.\" This religion's 24 tirthankaras have attained its ultimate goal of reaching moksha. Mahavira founded, for ten points, what Indian religion whose adherents fast rigorously to follow the principle of ahimsa, or nonviolence?", "Jainism", "M"]
["THe Auspicious Events of this religion include the Kevalgyan Kalyanaka, in which a certain figure delivers a speech from the Samavasarana. Nirjara, the act of destroying karmas, is one of the nine tattvas of this religion, which encourages its followers to pursue the Five Vows. It can be split into Svetambara and Digambara sects, the latter of which practices nudity and is known as (*) \"sky-clad.\" This religion's 24 tirthankaras have attained its ultimate goal of reaching moksha. Mahavira founded, for ten points, what Indian religion whose adherents fast rigorously to follow the principle of ahimsa, or nonviolence?", "Jainism", "M"]
["This figure placed upon four hills the cut-up remains of some birds, which miraculously rejoined when he called for them. Though he is not a friend of Daniel, Allah cooled a fire this man was thrown into. Eid al-Adha commemorates his faith and bravery, and unlike the Bible, the Qur'an relates that this man was told of his wife's pregnancy by three angels who refused to eat. The Qur'an names this man's father Azar, though in the Old Testament it is (*) Terah who owns the shop of idols this man destroys. This man's faith was tested when he was told to sacrifice his son. For ten points, name this patriarch of Islam and Judeo-Christianity, the father of Ishmael and Isaac and husband of Sarah.", "Abraham", "M"]
["This philosopher contended that the first thing to do in conducting state affairs is to \"rectify names\", and emphasized music and archery among the \"Six Arts\". One follower of this philosopher used the example of reactions to a child falling down a well to exemplify innate goodness, which begins the Trimetric Classic. This namesake of a philosophy advocated by (*) Mencius argued that rulers must cultivate \"ren\", or compassion, which formed the basis of the Mandate of Heaven. He also regarded filial piety as the most basic form of altruism. For ten points, name this Chinese philosopher whose beliefs are collected in the Analects.", "Confucius", "M"]
["Mandeans hold that this figure is the only true Messiah, while Mormons believe that he descended on the banks of the Susquehanna to talk with Joseph Smith. The Bab was supposedly a reappearance of this figure, whose father only regained the ability to speak after he named his child. This son of (*) Zechariah stirred often in the womb of his mother Elizabeth, and he was beheaded at the request of Herod's stepdaughter Salome. For ten points, name this predictor of Christ's arrival who was given his epithet due to his habit of dipping people in the Jordan River.", "John the Baptist", "M"]
["This object should be created using gevil, and a yad is used to point to specific parts of it to avoid contamination by dirty hands. The 613th commandment deals with the production of these objects, and while one is carried around, people kiss a book or prayer shawl they have touched it with. On a (*) Simchat late in the month of Tishrei that is named after this object, it is taken from the Ark and its scroll is unrolled while people sing and dance in the synagogue. For ten points, identify this most sacred Jewish text which contains the Five Books of Moses.", "Sefer Torah", "M"]
["It's not Yom Kippur, but in one prayer recited on this holiday, the name of a more common occurrence is replaced with this holiday's name following the words \"li-had-leek ner shel\". The central object of this holiday is supposed to be set up in a window, to draw the attention of passers-by, and that object contains the special (*) shamash. This holiday celebrates the victory of the Maccabees over Antiochus and commemorates the time a single day's worth of oil burned for eight days. This event includes the consumption of fried latkes and the lighting of a special nine-branched menorah. For ten points, name this Jewish holiday, the wintertime Festival of Lights.", "Hanukkah", "M"]
["One practitioner of this religion was killed by her schizophrenic son and was named Elli Perkins. People in this faith move up the Bridge to Total Freedom, and they practice the \"good roads, fair weather\" policy. A spiritual cleansing process known as \"auditing\" helps its members move from a Clear state to that of an Operating (*) Thetan. According to this religion, millions were killed on Earth with hydrogen bombs set off by the alien Xenu. This faith's \"space opera cosmogony\" was laid out by its founder, who wrote Dianetics. For ten points, identify this religion created by L. Ron Hubbard and practiced by people like Tom Cruise.", "Church of Scientology", "M"]
["According to the Qur'an, God taught this figure how to fashion chain-mail. To help him build a house, Hiram of Tyre sent this man cedar trees, and this man's rebellious son was killed after his hair got caught in a tree. This man married Michal after bringing 200 foreskins to her father, though he also sent (*) Uriah the Hittite to die in battle before marrying his wife Bathsheba. This father of Absalom was presented to Samuel by his father Jesse. After picking up five stones, this figure triumphed at the Valley of Elah over a Philistine giant. For ten points, name this second king of Israel who was succeeded by Solomon and is best known for slaying Goliath.", "David", "M"]
["One character in this book meets a couple who lies about the extent of their donations and later fall dead. That character later meets the centurion Cornelius and raises Tabitha from the dead. Ananias and Saphira appear in this book, which includes an episode in which Philip the Evangelist meets an Ethiopian eunuch and another in which Stephen is (*) stoned at the behest of the Sanhedrin. Before being shipwrecked on Malta, another character in this book is blinded on the road to Damascus and subsequently changes his name from Saul to Paul. For ten points, identify this book of the Bible which follows the Four Gospels and describes the deeds of various disciples of Christ", "Acts of the Apostles", "M"]
["In one part of this work, an all-day wrestling match is won only when a divine participant magically cuts his opponent's thigh sinews. In another section of this work, that opponent's son is renamed Zaphnath-Paaneath after being sold to Potiphar and ending a famine. An earlier character in this work fathered the child Ishmael with his maid Hagar, while another cursed his son, Ham, for seeing his nakedness. The beginning of this book concerns the naming of all creatures and the instruction to \"be fruitful and multiply.\" For 10 points, name this book of the Old Testament which states that \"in the beginning, God created the heavens and the Earth.\"", "Book of Genesis", "M"]
["Members of this religion ritually tie a girdle called a Kusti three times around their waist as a reminder of their purity. An ancient sect of this religion believed that Zurvan, a deity of time, was the source and creator of the world. Member of this religion bury their dead in open-air towers called dhakmas. This religion's main text is the Avesta, and adherents to this faith believe in Angra Mainyu, the evil and destructive counterpart of the god Ahura Mazda. For 10 points identify this dualistic Persian religion, whose Indian adherents are called Parsis.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["The Sikh form of this practice is known as anand karaj, and may only take place in a Gurudwara. According to Shi'a Islam, the mut'ah form of this practice, which is forbidden in Sunni Islam, must last at least three days. In the Baha'i faith, nineteen mithq\u00e1ls of silver must be gifted prior to one of these, and participants must recite \"We will all, verily, abide by the Will of God.\" Hindu women formerly engaged in self-immolation upon the deaths of a fellow-participant in this act, which in Catholicism can only be terminated through death or annulment. For 10 points, name this religious ceremony that sometimes involves the exchanging of rings.", "Marriage", "M"]
["One story in this work relates how the miraculous uprooting of a carob tree is not accepted as evidence by a group of scholars, while another passage discusses the renting of land that requires irrigation. A third section of this work declares that finders of lost property are considered to be shomer hinnam. Those stories are from this work's Bavia Metzia, which is a volume located in the Nezikin, the fourth order of this work's first half. This work contains commentary from figures such as Eliezer ben Hurcanus, and it is composed of the Gemara and the Mishnah. For 10 points, name this text of Rabbinic Judaism, which extensively discusses matters of Jewish law.", "Talmud", "M"]
["Participants in this event are allowed to perform certain activities until a white thread is visually distinguishable from a black one. During this time, the Night of Power occurs, marking a revelation from the angel Gabriel. Practices during this event include the Tarawih, extra prayers performed during the evening. The Fajr prayer marks the beginning of this period's defining practice, sawm, which is traditionally broken by Iftar. A large feast on the first day of Shawwal marks this period's end, called Eid al-Fitr. For 10 points, name this holiest Islamic month where adult adherents are obligated to fast from dawn to dusk.", "Ramadan", "M"]
["One member of this organization, Aloysius Gonzaga, died after helping plague victims while a student at the Gregorianum. Another member of this organization created the Kunyu Wanguo Quantu. The Superior Generals of this organization are sometimes called \"Black Popes,\" and this organization professes its membership for \"whoever desires to serve as a soldier of God.\" One early missionary from this organization found success in India and Japan, although he never reached China; that man was Francis Xavier. For 10 points, name this evangelical order founded by Ignatius of Loyola, of which the current Pope is a member.", "Society of Jesus", "M"]
["This observance comes after the Fast of Gedalia, which laments the assassination of a governor of Judea, and selections from the Book of Hosea are read during Shabbat Shuvah that precedes this holiday. Three successively louder recitations of the prayer of \"Kol nidre,\" or \"all vows,\" on the evening of this holiday represent the congregation's hope to be scribed in the Book of Life. Many Jews wear white kittels to symbolize purity during this holiday, which is accompanied by five purifying prohibitions. For 10 points, name this tenth day of Tishrei, the Day of Atonement, which follows the High Holy Days and the celebration of Rosh Hashanah.", "Yom Kippur", "M"]
["This movement teaches that mountains were created by bombs that drill into the Earth in order to balance it, and this movement commemorates the birth of its founder with Saviour's Day. This movement's theology involves a scientist with a large cranium who lived on the island of Patmos, and this movement's interpretation of the Book of Ezekiel involves the creation of a $15 billion \"Mother Plane.\" Part of this movement's scripture states that the Tribe of Shabazz was the origin of most races and that white men were created through \"grafting\" by Dr. Yakub. For 10 points, name this religious denomination whose current leader is Louis Farrakhan.", "Nation of Islam", "M"]
["Members of this faith believe that the universe was born when all souls heard a tremendous snapping noise and saw a golden chariot, and that they were later accosted by gray Helatroban clouds shouting \"Hark, hark!\" The 29 pledges of the Auditor's Code govern this faith's removal of harmful memories of Incidents from the preclear, who then gains authority over MEST. This religion's Wall of Fire myth concerns the trauma of billions of souls being brought to Teegeeack and exploded with hydrogen bombs by Supreme Galactic Overlord Xenu. For 10 points, name this religion based on a system of Dianetics, founded by the prophet L. Ron Hubbard.", "Church of Scientology", "H"]
["Maimonides classified this action into eight levels using the metaphor of a ladder. Luke 11:14 states that \"everything will be clean for you\" after performing this act. One of the Three Pillars of Sikhism, Vand Chhako, mandates this action, which is often performed in langars. This action is exemplified by the Shi'a practice of khums. Jesus praises a widow's performance of this action in order to teach the \"lesson of the widow's mite.\" One form of this action in Islam is called sadaqah, which is similar to the Jewish concept of tzedakah. In Islam, this practice is mandated if your income is above the nisab, in which case you must perform zakat. For 10 points, name this action that involves giving to the poor.", "Charity", "H"]
["Abraham Abulafia wrote several books on the proper way to perform this practice in Judaism. It's not prayer, but this practice is known as either hisbonenus or hisbodedus in Hebrew. In Sufi tradition, it is called muraqaba. In 1989, the Holy See released a document titled \"aspects of\" this practice, distancing it from similar practices in other religions. Along with four standing exercises, this practice is one of the five exercises of Falun Gong, and it is a key component of qigong. This practice can be aided by the technique of omphaloskepsis. In Zen Buddhism, this practice is called zazen when it is performed sitting down. In Christianity, it is often performed while repeating Hail Marys by considering the Mysteries of the Rosary. For 10 points, name this practice of directed contemplation which is often accompanied by the chanting of mantras.", "Meditation", "H"]
["In Jacobus de Voragine's Golden Legend, this man kills his half brother and becomes conflated with the Oedipus story by killing his father and marrying his mother. Nils Runeberg writes three texts about this man in a Jorge Luis Borges story about \"Three Versions\" of this person. A Gnostic gospel named after this man contains an account of a temple at which animal sacrifices are performed and asserts that creation began with a \"luminous cloud.\" The Cainites asserted that this man acted in accordance with Jesus to bring about the proper series of events. According to Acts, he dies when his body bursts apart after he buys the Field of Blood. He identifies Jesus with a kiss in the Garden of Gethsemane, leading to Jesus's arrest by the Sanhedrin. For 10 points, name this disciple who received thirty pieces of silver for his betrayal of Jesus.", "Judas Iscariot", "H"]
["Upon arriving near this city, one person witnesses a man with a drawn sword whom he recognizes as a divine captain, which causes him to remove one of his shoes. A group bound for this city leaves twelve stones behind as a monument after encamping at Gilgal. The destruction of this city is followed by the destruction of the city of Ai. One resident of this city hangs a red thread from her window after hiding two enemy spies on her rooftop. The family of the harlot Rahab survives the destruction of this city, which follows it being encircled on seven consecutive days by a group of people carrying rams' horns. The fall of this city is central to the conquest of Canaan by Joshua. For 10 points, name this Biblical city famed for its walls.", "Jericho", "H"]
["The Cathars practiced a spiritual form of this ritual called the consolamentum. Historically, this ritual was preceded by insufflation or exsufflation. Like confirmation and Holy Orders, this ritual is said have sacramental character because it imparts a spiritual seal on the soul of the participant. A catechumen is someone who plans to undergo this ritual. Conrad Grebel and Ulrich Zwingli rejected one form of this ritual. Mormons perform this ritual on behalf of dead people, including, controversially, Anne Frank. Catholics believe it is necessary for salvation, which is why it is performed on infants. For 10 points, name this Christian rite which generally involves pouring water on the participant.", "Baptism", "H"]
["The Indian subcontinent is home to a reformist movement within this denomination called Deobandi, as well as a more traditional movement within this denomination called Barelvi. An important set of texts in this denomination is known as \"The Six Books.\" Most members of this denomination pray with their hands folded, as opposed to at their sides. The name of this denomination comes from a word referring to the sayings and actions of Muhammad. This denomination recognizes Abu Bakr, rather than Ali, as the first caliph. Branches of this denomination include Salafism and the ultra-conservative Wahhabism. For 10 points, name this largest branch of Islam, contrasted with Shia.", "Sunni Islam", "H"]
["The planned resettlement of Jews in this country was the subject of the Five Ministers' Conference. A religion originating in this country contains a list of transgressions called the Eight Dusts and believes that physical bodies are borrowed to live the Joyous Life. The patron saint of Mexico City, Philip de Jesus, was killed in this country as one of the Twenty-Six Martyrs. One festival practiced in this country is named after the ages of children who partake in it and has a name translating as \"seven five three.\" Suspected Christians in this country were forced to step on images of Jesus or Mary in a period during which they were labelled \"hidden.\" The first Catholic missionary to this country was Francis Xavier, and one of its religions worships kami. For 10 points, name this home country of Tenrikyo and Shinto.", "Japan", "H"]
["A tapestry depicting the history of this sect was conceived by Anne Wynn-Wilson. Members of this sect can request a clearness committee if they seek solutions to their concerns or problems. An early group of leaders of this sect was known as the Valiant Sixty, and included people like James Nayler and Margaret Fell. It is considered one of the peace churches because of its practice of peace testimony. Many regional groups within this sect issue Books of Discipline and are named for the Yearly Meetings which they organize. The founder of this sect advocated \"plain speaking,\" including the use of the pronoun \"thee.\" They believe that God is present in each person in the form of the inner light. For 10 points, name this sect founded by George Fox, officially known as the Society of Friends.", "Quakers", "H"]
["An order given by one of these figures is known as a hukamnama. One of them rode a blue horse called Nila Ghora. One of these figures was tortured for five days before mysteriously disappearing in a river. The first of these figures is said to have disappeared the morning after his death, leaving only the flowers which were placed on either side of him. In 1699, one of these figures baptized his congregation by administering Amrit and giving them a name meaning \"lion,\" thus founding the Khalsa, a group of people who are required to wear the Five Ks. The current one was appointed by Gobind Singh as his successor, and was compiled by Arjan as a sacred text called the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this group of eleven religious leaders, the first of whom was Nanak.", "Sikh gurus", "H"]
["To respond to the persecution of Catholics in this country, Pius XI issued the papal bulls Iniquis Afflictisque. Several bishops in this country opposed a tyrant nicknamed \"Bloody Guzman.\" Orange marigolds are associated with one holiday celebrated in this country; on that holiday, which coincides with All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day, people compose short poems whose name translates as \"skulls.\" One person in this country experienced a religious vision that told him to go cut some flowers despite it not being the season for them to blossom, thus healing his sick uncle. That man, Juan Diego, claimed to have seen the Virgin Mary as Our Lady of Guadalupe. For 10 points, name this country that celebrates the Day of the Dead, and in which Catholicism was spread after the conquest of the Aztec empire.", "Mexico", "H"]
["This structure is flanked by three Bhanjani Ber trees, and it is alleged to have originally risen from an excavated tank that was referred to as \"The Pool of the Nectar of Immortality.\" This square-based building features a door on each of its sides to symbolize that it's open to people of all creeds and ethnicities. This building harbours a text that contains thousands of Angs and Baanis; that text is also considered alive. The founder of one empire that consisted of several Misls between the Sutlej and Jhelum Rivers gilded this building; that leader was Ranjit, the Lion of the Punjab. Operation Woodrose followed one anti-terrorist raid that occurred here, which later led to the assassination of the woman that ordered it, by her bodyguards: that woman was Indira Gandhi. For 10 points, what is this Sikh gurdwara found in Amritsar that is known for its rich color?", "Harmandir Sahib", "H"]
["A husband and wife pair of these figures are considered to be the first priest and priestess. One of these figures is said to have been the woman who sacrificed a black pig in a 1791 ceremony sometimes described as a pact with the devil. These figures are classified into families known as nanchons. They live in a place called Vilokan, which can be accessed by one of them who can speak all human languages. They are invoked in rituals in which they are represented by symbols called veves. They are divided into groups including \"Rada\" and \"Petro.\" These figures, which can be summoned by priests called houngans, include Maman Brigitte, Papa Legba, and Baron Samedi. For 10 points, name these voodoo spirits.", "Advanced Audio Coding", "H"]
["Some speculation about the origins of this holiday derives from its mention in the Sanskrit play Ratnavali. In the area of Kumaon, this festival takes the form of a musical gathering. This holiday celebrates an incident in which Prahlada miraculously survived being burned on a pyre, while a demoness who was the sister of Hiranyakashipu was killed. This holiday's main day falls on a full moon, or purnima, during the month of Phalguna. On the eve of the main day of this festival, huge bonfires are lit and cakes made of cow dung are thrown into them. On the morning of this holiday, people frolic with cows to usher in spring. For 10 points, what is this Hindu festival that is highlighted by the throwing of colorful dyes?", "Holi", "H"]
["In one society, a ritual involving this type of person used a blade which was also used to cut the umbilical cord after childbirth, the peseshkaf. These people wore crowns of justification. A symbolic ritual involving these people is known as the opening of the mouth ceremony. Statues known as ushabti were provided to these people. These people were involved in a ceremony which often took place in a mastaba. In that ceremony, spells were cast to help these people in their journey to Duat, and those spells are found in collections like the Pyramid Texts and a book named for these people. For 10 points, name this type of person who, in ancient Egypt, was often mummified.", "Ancient Egypt", "H"]
["This Biblical book recounts how Dorcas dies and is brought back to life. The governors Felix and Festus interrogate one character in this book. A sermon from this book begins by mentioning an inscription \"to an unknown god\" and is delivered to the Areopagus. This book tells the story of the conversion of an Ethiopian eunuch to Christianity. In another story told in this book, Ananias is sent to the \"Straight Street\" in Damascus to restore the sight of a certain figure. This is the second Biblical book to be dedicated to Theophilus. This New Testament book famously recounts the story of the stoning of Stephen by a mob, as well as the occurrence of glossolalia at Pentecost. For 10 points, name this book of the Bible written by Luke that describes what happens after the death of Jesus to twelve of his followers.", "Acts of the Apostles", "H"]
["Creatures described in this book include one whose \"strength is in his loins\" and whose \"force is in the navel of his belly,\" as well as one that \"maketh the sea like a pot of ointment\" and \"is a king over all the children of pride.\" One man in this book complains that \"My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh, and I am escaped with the skin of my teeth.\" In this book, God speaks out of a whirlwind and denounces as \"words without knowledge\" the accusatory speeches of Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar. By the end of this book, the title resident of Uz has seven sons and three daughters once again, along with twice as many animals as before. For 10 points, name this book of the Bible in which God lets Satan test a man's piety by causing him lots of suffering.", "Book of Job", "H"]
["According to one story, this man went to a market after hearing a voice at St. Damien's directing him to repair a local church. This figure was assisted in his most notable task by Bernard of Quintavalle. This man gave away all the merchandise he had brought to a market to a beggar, after which this figure's father practically disowned him. Followers of this figure abide by his namesake \"Primitive Rule.\" Along with Catherine of (*) Siena, this man is a patron saint of Italy. This saint praised God for the creation of things like \"brother Fire\" and \"sister Water\" in the Canticle of Sun. Pope Innocent III authorized this man's creation of the Order of St. Claire and a namesake \"Third Order.\" For 10 points, name this patron saint of animals and namesake of the current pope.", "Francis of Assisi", "H"]
["On this holiday, a sacrifice involving three groups of laity occurs. In Israel, this holiday is seven days long, and the second day marks the beginning of the counting of the Omer. Samaritans observe this holiday by making a pilgrimage to Mount Gerizim. All chametz must be forsaken on this holiday, on which the youngest child says \"Ma Nishtana\" as a part of the (*) \"four questions\" ritual. Observers eat bitter herbs known as maror and a young lamb on this holiday, on which unleavened matzo bread is also consumed. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday that commemorates the Israelites' escape from Egypt after the tenth plague spared Jewish newborns.", "Passover", "H"]
["In Judaism, this action is sometimes performed on the \"Bahab\" days of the months of Marcheshvan and Iyar. In Eastern Orthodoxy, this action is most strictly mandated in conjunction with the Dormition of the Theotokos. In Judaism, this action occurs on days named for Gedaliah, Tevet, and Esther. This action, which is known as (*) ta'anit in Hebrew, must be done for a 25-hour period on Tisha B'av and Yom Kippur. In Islam, the end of a period in which this action is required is the festival of Eid Al-Adha. For 10 points, name this action that is done during the daytime during the month of Ramadan.", "Fasting", "H"]
["This religious movement traditionally recognized \"Recorded Ministers,\" some of whom ran unplanned \"waiting worships\" that concluded when the two eldest worshipers exchanged a handshake. Its earliest leaders were known as the \"Valiant Sixty.\" The \"Gurneyites\" are one offshoot of this movement, whose members typically attend Yearly Meetings. This religious movement, which traditionally used the pronoun (*) \"thee\" and refused to swear oaths, believes that they all have Christ's \"inner light\" shining within them. It was founded in the 1600s in England by George Fox. For 10 points, name this nonviolent protestant sect also known as the \"Society of Friends.\"", "Quakers", "H"]
["The Thabal Chongba dance is performed during this holiday. The Ganga-mela occurs during this holiday, which occurs during the month of Falgun. In some places, offerings of delicious Puran Poli are made to Agni during this holiday. Effigies of Hiranya-kashipu's (*) sister are burned during this holiday, and celebrations related to this holiday can take place on Rangapanchami, which occurs five days after this holiday. This holiday celebrates the triumph of Prahlada over his father, who had demanded that everyone pray to him instead of the gods, and it typically occurs in March on the solar calendar. For 10 points, celebrants throw colored powders at one another during what Hindu spring festival?", "Holi", "H"]
["The divinity of an honor afforded this man's descendants was confirmed when the earth opened up and swallowed his cousin Korah and other rebellious men. This man's eldest and second-eldest sons, Nadab and Abihu, failed to wait for holy fire and instead lit incense, for which they were burned alive with holy fire. In conflicting Biblical accounts, this man either died at Mosera or after ascending (*) Mount Hor. This man, who descendants were known as Kohen, carried a rod that miraculously flowered. This first High Priest of the Israelites was the eldest brother of Miriam. For 10 points, name this constructor of the Golden Calf, the older brother of Moses.", "Aaron", "H"]
["The third and fourth books of this work are presented as a dialogue between the title figure and the disciple. In its fourth book, this work's title figure instructs the follower to \"clean the mansions of your heart\" in order to receive the Blessed Sacrament. The Latin phrase \"Sic transit gloria mundi,\" or \"thus passes the glory of the world,\" likely derives from the third chapter of this work. This work, whose four books include \"Directives for Interior Life\" and \"On Interior Consolation,\" was written in the (*) 1400s by a member of the Devotia Moderna movement in the Netherlands. For 10 points, name this devotional by Thomas a Kempis that suggests emulating Jesus through contemplative study.", "The Imitation of Christ", "H"]
["A method of performing this action which is popular in West Africa is known as warsh, whereas in the U.S., the majority of practitioners of this action use hafs. Qalqalah, Idghaam and ikhfaa can be used when performing this action, which is governed by the rules of tajweed. This action is only performed aloud in salaat if the imaam is praying in a group, and someone proficient in this action is termed a qari, which literally means \"reader.\" For 10 points, name this action carried out to share the principal Muslim holy text.", "Tajwid", "H"]
["This man twice replied, \"As the Lord lives, and as you yourself live, I will not leave you\" after another man said not to accompany him to Bethel and Jericho. This man turned his servant Gehazi into a leper for accepting gifts from the Syrian general Naaman, whom he told to bathe seven times in the Jordan River. After a widow asked him for help, he multiplied the oil she had into many jars so she could pay her debt. This man responded to boys who mocked his baldness by summoning two she-bears to maul them to death. He asked for \"a double-portion of your spirit\" on the far bank of the Jordan, where he picked up the mantle of a prophet taken up into the whirlwind. For 10 points, name this disciple and successor of Elijah.", "Elisha", "H"]
["In the Book of Genesis, Tamar uses this substance prior to tearing her ornamented robe. When Jonah finally warns the citizens of Nineveh of their fate, the king of the city dons a sackcloth and sits amidst this substance. Another form of this substance, vibhuti, is mixed with water and applied by devotees to Lord Shiva. On a movable feast day that marks the beginning of Jesus's forty days spent in the desert, this substance is applied to one's forehead, sometimes after the palm fronds from the preceding Sunday are burned to produce this thing. For 10 points, name this substance that names the \"Wednesday\" of the first day of Lent.", "Ashes", "H"]
["These beings can be summoned by a sacred rattle known as the asson. Subgroups of them include the older ones called \"Rada\" and the more warlike ones called \"Petro.\" One of these beings who protects children holds an apple in his left hand and has a cigar in his mouth. Another of these beings resembles an old man wearing a straw hat and is found at the crossroads between humanity and the other types of these beings. A notorious one of them is married to Maman Brigitte and wears a top hat. These beings are intermediaries between humans and the creator god, Bondye. They include Papa Legba and Baron Samedi. For 10 points, name these spirits in voodoo.", "Advanced Audio Coding", "H"]
["According to some believers, the nafs of one of these beings dwells within a barrier called al-Barzakh. Usually, only a qiyaam and no tashahhud are required in a service devoted to these beings. A three-part or five-part kafan cloth is worn by these people, to whom a janazah ceremony is dedicated. These people are asked three questions by Munkar and Nakir. Though they're not converts, a believer should say the Shahada just before becoming this type of person, just as Jews aim to say the Shema before becoming one. For 10 points, name this type of person whose status, according to Islam, is reversed prior to divine judgment on the Day of Resurrection.", "Otto; or Up with Dead People", "H"]
["In the Taiwanese Yimin Festival, these animals are force fed and paraded. In Buddhism, a snake, bird, and this animal represent the three poisons, with this animal representing ignorance. The Mahayana Buddhist goddess of the dawn Marici is usually depicted riding on seven of these animals. When a demon named Hiranyaksha dragged the earth to the bottom of the sea, an avatar of Vishnu named Varaha took this form and raised the earth out of the sea. While in Gerasenes, Jesus cast Legion into a herd of these animals, which subsequently ran off of a cliff into the sea. For 10 points, name this type of animal which Leviticus 11:8 states is unclean to eat.", "Pig", "H"]
["Bernard Pyne Grenfell and Arthur Surridge Hunt found a group of these objects at Oxyrhynchus. A \"Villa\" from Herculaneum named for these things was owned by Lucius Calpurnius Piso and was copied directly in the Getty Villa. The \"Rhind\" one of these is a good source on ancient mathematics. These objects deteriorated with mold over the centuries in wet climates and could only survive in dry climates. Callimachus created the Pinakes as a classification system for these, many of which were produced in Alexandria. Many ancient texts were preserved on, for 10 points, what writing surface made from a wetland plant found in Egypt?", "Papyrus", "H"]
["The events of this book seem to oppose principles espoused in Deuteronomy 23:3. Two characters in it have names meaning \"sickness\" and \"wasting.\" In this book, Ploni Almoni gives up his right to marry the title character, who has a son named Obed. One character in this book declares \"Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee.\" Traditionally, Samuel is held to be the author of this book, in which the sons of Elimelech, Mahlon and Chilion, marry the title character and Orpah respectively. The protagonist gleans barley for her mother-in-law Naomi and meets a man whose feet she later uncovers. For 10 points, name this book of the Old Testament whose title character is a woman who marries Boaz.", "Book of Ruth", "H"]
["In Matthew, this person's death is said to fulfill a prophecy from Jeremiah, though most scholars believe Matthew meant Zechariah. His namesake Gospel, part of the Codex Tchacos, delineates the division of souls into those that are immortal and those that disappear at death, and states that his actions were ordered by Jesus. He fell into the Akeldama after his death, which by some accounts was a suicide by hanging. This man was replaced by Matthias after accepting the Sanhedrin's offer of thirty pieces of silver to kiss his mentor. For 10 points, name this Apostle who betrayed Jesus.", "Judas Iscariot", "H"]
["In the lead-up to this event, the apostles question Jesus's resolve to return to Judaea because he has been threatened with stoning there. The shortest verse in the Bible occurs right before this event, in which Jesus says to God, \"I thank thee that thou hast heard me.\" This event sparks Caiaphas to make plans to execute Jesus. When Jesus performs this miracle, he states \"whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee,\" before proceeding to declare \"Come forth\" next to a cave. The subject of this miracle was a native of Bethany and the brother of Mary and Martha. For 10 points, name this miracle performed by Jesus in the Book of John, in which a certain man was raised from the dead.", "Raising of Lazarus", "H"]
["In the parable of the Faithful Servant, Jesus tells his disciples to be like servants awaiting the return of their master from one of these events. In Matthew, Jesus compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a king whose servants are killed when they invite men to one of these events, and a man is ejected from this event with \"weeping and grinding of teeth\" for not wearing the proper garments. In another parable, Jesus tells of five foolish virgins who were prevented from attending one of these events after leaving to get oil. At one of these events, Jesus tells his mother \"my hour has not yet come\" and performs his first miracle in the Gospel of John when he turns water into wine. For 10 points, name these events, one of which occurred at Cana.", "Wedding", "M"]
["Adherents of this religion greet each other with the words \"sat sri akal\". This religion's services are ended by reading a randomly selected verse from its scripture, and in this religion's places of worship, communal kitchens serve free food to visitors regardless of their backgrounds. Members of this faith are baptized by being sprinkled with and then drinking sugar water, and adherents wear metal bracelets and carry daggers as two of this religion's Five Ks. Name this Indian religion founded by a series of ten gurus, beginning with Guru Nanak, whose members maintain their uncut hair in turbans.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["One text in this religion describes the soul's journey towards God by reaching one of the title locations \"of True Poverty and Absolute Nothingness\". That book is The Seven Valleys. This religion's main theological text is the Kit\u00e1b-i-\u00cdq\u00e1n, and it was led by Shoghi Effendi until the establishment of the Universal House of Justice. Adherents believe in the unity of God, religion, and humanity, and in the revelation of God's nature through prophets such as Jesus and Muhammad. Name this faith founded by a Persian born with the name M\u00edrz\u00e1 \u1e24usayn-Al\u00ed N\u00far\u00ed, who was heralded by the B\u00e1b and changed his name to Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["This work notes that those who fail to believe in Moses and the Prophets will not believe in a resurrected man. One character in this book is a tax collector who climbs a tree due to his short stature and is named Zacchaeus [zak-KAY-us]. In a parable in this book, an elder brother is bitter that his younger brother was welcomed home by their father despite having forsaken him and squandered his birthright. Its introduction to Theophilus implies that its author, a physician, also wrote the Acts of the Apostles. Name this synoptic gospel which traditionally is placed third in the New Testament, between those of Mark and John.", "Gospel of Luke", "M"]
["This is the first holiday of the year in which \"Al Ha-Nissim\" is added to the Amidah. Hillel and Shammai debated whether a ritual for this holiday should be done increasingly or decreasingly; that ritual involves a shamash. On this holiday, children play a game involving a device marked with initials referring to \"a great miracle\" and sing songs including \"Ma'oz Tsur\". The aforementioned device is a dreidel, and the miracle of this holiday is oil in the Temple burning for eight days after a revolt led by Judah Maccabee. Name this Jewish festival that includes the lighting of a nine-branched menorah.", "Hanukkah", "M"]
["This man prophesied that Damascus and Samaria would fall before his son Maher-shalal-hash-baz could say \"mother\" or \"father\". Like Micah, he described a time of peace when people \"shall beat their swords into plowshares.\" His namesake book describes a man \"wounded for our transgressions\" and \"bruised for our iniquities\" in its \"servant songs\" and a boy called \"Wonderful, Counsellor\" and a \"Prince of Peace\". He prophesied that a young woman \"shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.\" Name this first of the major prophets whose namesake book precedes that of Jeremiah.", "Isaiah", "M"]
["Some traditions begin this holiday a day early by commemorating the milking of the Earth in the form of a cow. The drawing of small footprints and buying of silver jewelry characterize its first day, and courtyards are decorated with colorful grains and powders arranged in floral patterns in preparation for this holiday. On its fifth and final day, brothers dine at the homes of their sisters, and this holiday welcomes the goddess of wealth during the autumn month of Ashvin. This holiday commemorates Lakshmi by illuminating rows of wooden lanterns and oil lamps. Name this Hindu festival of lights.", "Diwali", "M"]
["Adherents of this religion may only consume fish smaller than twelve inches. The word \"Nyabinghi\" refers either to one sect of this religion or a type of ritual drumming. Adherents maintain their bodies as temples by following the largely vegan I-tal [\"eye\"-TAHL] diet, and they refer to themselves as \"I and I.\" This religion shortens God's name from Jehovah to simply \"Jah\" and viewed emperor Haile Selassie [\"HIGHLY\" suh-LAA-see] as the second coming of Jesus Christ. Name this religion often publicized in reggae music that was popular in Jamaica, whose adherents smoke ganja, or cannabis, and wear their hair in dreadlocks.", "Rastafari", "M"]
["This religion is believed to have originated the Nowruz festival celebrated on the March equinox. Adherents of this religion wear white vests with pockets for collecting good deeds, and cords made of seventy-two threads that are tied and untied several times daily. Only nine of this religion's temples house the Atash Behram, a collection of sixteen types of fire. A group of seventeen hymns called the Gathas are found in this religion's holy text, the Avesta. This religion centers around the clash between the evil Angra Mainyu and the good Ahura Mazda. Identify this Persian religion named for its founding prophet.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["Poor Hindus may request for a simplified version of this ritual called kanthi-badal, but standard versions involve taking seven steps around a fire. In Shinto, this ceremony involves taking three sips each from three cups of sake [sah-keh], while the walimah feast comes after Muslim ones. A get reverses the Jewish version, which takes place under a chuppah [KOO-pah] and ends with the crushing of a glass under one participant's foot. 1 Corinthians 13 [\"first Corinthians, chapter thirteen\"] is often read at the Christian version of this ceremony. Name this practice which traditionally involves the exchange of rings.", "Marriage", "M"]
["On the holiday that ends this event, a third of a slaughtered animal's meat is donated to the poor. A sheep is sacrificed after the ritual shaving of one's hair in an optional variant on this event. Male participants don two white sheets of cloth to prepare for this event. In one of its rituals, adherents throw stones at three walls and rapidly walk back and forth between two hills. The Feast of Sacrifice, or Eid al-Adha, ends this event, during which participants make seven counter-clockwise trips around the Kaaba. Name this pillar of Islam which requires Muslims to make a pilgrimage to Mecca.", "Hajj", "H"]
["These locations contain metal urns called afringans. A bell in these structures is rung five times to mark the boi ceremony. The middle grade of these structures requires an offering from soldiers, farmers, priests, and artisans, and is called Adaran. An offering made in these places mixes three twigs, water, milk, and pomegranate leaves. Attendance at these places is high during Nowruz. These structures are based on the idea that Atar is an agent of (*) purification. Offerings of the haoma plant are done by white-clad priests in these buildings, which must be built near water. People recite the Yasna in these structures while venerating Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name these houses of worship in Zoroastrianism, which venerate an exothermic chemical process.", "Fire temple", "H"]
["During the Christian End Times, a childbearing woman will escape one of these places created by the Red Dragon. In Ezekiel 47, a man leads the narrator east to one of these places, and Ezekiel had his first prophecies at one of these called Kebar. Jacob limps by one of these called Jabbok after wrestling the angel. Ephraimites were killed at one of these places if they failed to properly pronounce the word (*) \"shibboleth.\" After Jesus exited one of these places, the Holy Spirit descended as a dove and God spoke. Amos 5:24 asks justice to \"roll\" like one of these locales. Pharaoh's priests laughed off the bloody appearance of a large one during the first plague. For 10 points, name this type of geographic feature which baby Moses traveled down in a basket.", "River", "H"]
["This otherwise-illegal practice was aided by the Mantoku-ji and Tokei-ji temples in Edo-era Japan. In Malachi 2:16, God says that he \"hates\" this practice, which is impossible in Judaism for a person called an agunah. A three month waiting period called iddah is required before khula or another Islamic form which requires saying the word talaq (*) three times. This procedure has the same effect as Pauline Privilege, and in Jewish communities it requires a written document called a get to be presented by the man. For 10 points, name this procedure forbidden in Catholicism, which instead declares a union null and void from the beginning through annulment.", "Divorce", "H"]
["It's not Mithraism, but a treatise of this sect specifies seven levels of purification analogized to relay chariots. This tradition once consisted of eighteen schools of thought but now has only one. Ascetics of this religious group cannot eat solid food after midday or accept money gifts once their time as a samanera ends. This sect rejects the idea of bardo limbo, and specifies the \"once-returner\" and \"stream-enterer\" among four levels of attainment. Adherents of this tradition only use scriptures written in the (*) Pali language, and try on their own to become uncorrupted arhats by following the Tipitaka and meditating. For 10 points, name this \"Way of the Elders\" found in Burma and Thailand, a more traditional sect that reveres Siddartha Gautama.", "Theravada", "H"]
["The first of these figures befriended Lalo, a poor carpenter whose bread could be squeezed to produce milk. They included a boy who died of smallpox at age nine after calling for five coins and a coconut, and a supporter of horse trading who arranged a set of poems according to their musical modes. Another of these figures urged every house to act like a communal temple kitchen, and (*) emerged with a bloody sword without harming five men who entered his tent. The body of the first one vanished, leaving only flowers behind, and the last of them is a book rather than a person. The first one claimed \"There is no Hindu, there is no Muslim\" in Punjab. For 10 points, name this line of teachers starting with Nanak, who Sikhs revere.", "Sikh gurus", "H"]
["C.S. Lewis equated this belief system's central concept with traditional morality in The Abolition of Man. The Northern sect of this belief system is centered at White Cloud Abbey. Writings in this belief system compare the naming of a concept to cutting an uncarved block of wood. In an allegory, its founder blamed his mind for the sour taste of vinegar. Its central text makes two comparisons to the Great Mother and claims in 81 aphoristic chapters that \"the (*) name that cannot be named is not the eternal name.\" A scholar who dreamt that he was a dreaming butterfly adhered to this belief system, which stresses acting without action, or wu wei. For 10 points, name this belief system of Zhuangzi and Laozi, which respects an ineffable \"Way.\"", "Taoism", "H"]
["In one of this man's writings, he mentions angels that are placed \"into gloomy dungeons to be held for judgment.\" He gets the instruction \"Feed my sheep,\" and is told that \"someone else will dress you and lead you where you do not want to go.\" This man says \"May your money perish with you!\" when rejecting Simon Magus, and meets a centurion named (*) Cornelius early in the Book of Acts. This man attacks Malchus by cutting off an ear, and is crucified upside down. This recipient of the keys to the kingdom of heaven is called a \"rock\" upon whom the church will be built. For 10 points, name this disciple of Jesus who denies Christ three times, believed to be the first Pope.", "Saint Peter", "H"]
["One teacher contrasted this movement to a \"wellspring of wisdom below\" by suggesting that it is a set of \"gates of wisdom above\" that will open in the year 6600. The Vilna Gaon wrote commentaries in the method of this movement, whose Cordoverian branch was displaced by the Lurianic branch. One founder of this intellectual tradition died on the 33rd day of the Omer. This tradition's name means \"reception,\" and it believes in a type of will called \"crown,\" or keter. Adherents use a (*) tree-like diagram to show ten interlinked \"emanations\" of the infinite, called sefirot. This tradition's founding text, the Zohar, used methods such as numerology to reinterpret the Talmud and Torah. For 10 points, name this tradition of Jewish mysticism.", "Kabbalah", "H"]
["This passage argues that the word \"Raca\" leaves its utterers in danger of a council. The second part of The Cost of Discipleship, by Dietrich Bonhoeffer, studies this passage, which asks rhetorically if people pick grapes from thornbushes or figs from thistles. This passage warns people that they have to take a beam out of their eye to remove a speck from (*) another's eye. It notes that no work or spinning is done by lilies in the fields. This passage compares its addressees to the \"salt of the earth\" and originates the claim that the meek shall inherit the earth. Its deliverer starts with nine statements about the blessed, the Beatitudes, and teaches the Lord's Prayer to a crowd. For 10 points, name this passage in Matthew, an early speech by Jesus.", "Sermon on the Mount", "H"]
["In Falun Gong, this concept is called ye and directly opposes de, or virtue, as the reason for human unhappiness. Agami is a subtype of this concept, which is itself one of five niyama. In Jainism, colorations emerge when the jiva attaches to this concept, which is made of material particles. This concept is often described as leading to vipaka or (*) \"fruits.\" Unlike jnana or bhakti yoga, its namesake yoga is based on disciplining one's actions. Its existence perpetuates samsara. For 10 points, name this Eastern concept of cause and effect, which leads a person's deeds to affect their reincarnation prospects.", "Karma", "H"]
["This celebration uses a descending minor third for \"zakef katon\" in its unique set of tropes. The onomatopoetic refrain \"Hava narisha, rash, rash, rash\" is in a song about this holiday. Its \"Katan\" form is in a month marked \"Bet\" in seven years out of every nineteen. The names of ten sons are said in one breath on this holiday, whose stories include eunuchs named Bigtan and Teresh. Observers give out baskets of ready-made food, and remember pockets, ears, and/or (*) hats by eating similarly-shaped cookies. A megillah featuring a large gallows and a hero in Shushan is read on this holiday, on which drunk congregants wave groggers to drown out Haman's name. For 10 points, name this costume holiday which celebrates the saving of Persian Jews by Esther.", "Purim", "H"]
["This man once asked to die under a juniper tree before an angel showed him bread baking on coals. This anointer of Hazael gave a \"double portion of his spirit\" to the son of Shaphat, his successor. At Zarephath, this man survived a three-year drought due to refilling supplies of flour and oil from a (*) widow's house. He claimed that dogs would lick blood off the ground as he criticized the seizure of Naboth's vineyard. On Mount Carmel, this Tishbite set an altar where God's fire fell on a bull, humiliating priests of Ba'al and king Ahab. Many Jews believe he will return with the Messiah. For 10 points, name this Biblical prophet who was taken by chariot to heaven, the teacher of Elisha.", "Elijah", "H"]
["William Wrede said this text features commands for silence because its central figure had to hide his identity. In this book, a man in Bethsaida sees tree-like shapes while his vision is getting fixed, and near its end a group of women \"said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid\". One man in this book says that things men say and do, not the food they eat, make them unclean. In the two-source hypothesis, this text is about as old as the Q source. A young man who runs away (*) naked in this work is said to be its author. A possible original ending for this book features three women at an empty tomb midway through its sixteenth and final chapter, before they hear about the Resurrection. For 10 points, name this synoptic Gospel between Matthew and Luke.", "Gospel of Mark", "H"]
["In ancient Rome, these people would pray with a pronuba matron. According to hadith, the procedure for becoming one of these requires consent from a wali who is mahram. It's not any kind of royalty, but a metaphorical one of them is greeted in the Hebrew song \"L'cha Dodi\" and symbolizes Shabbat. In India, these people get a mangalsutra or thaali before making seven accompanied walks around a sacred (*) fire of Agni. In slave communities, this person was the second to enter a door by jumping over a broom. In Judaism, these people are protected by a ketubah contract and watch a man stomp on a glass under a canopy. For 10 points, name these women who, in Christianity, often wear a veil before vowing \"I do.\"", "Bride", "H"]
["One religious group left this country to settle on Mount Athos and believed that the name of God is God himself. This is the easternmost country where the forged Book of Veles inspires neopaganism. Religious symbols from this country include a slanted beam at the low end of a three-bar cross. A historic schism in this modern-day country resulted from reducing the seven prosphora to five and the use of a two-fingered Sign of the Cross. The (*) Buryat shamans live in this country, which gave the term \"shaman\" to Europe. Old Believers were persecuted by Nikon, the Patriarch of its capital. Islam is still practiced by Kazan Tatars in this country. For 10 points, name this Orthodox Christian country where many onion domes sit atop Saint Basil's Cathedral.", "Russia", "H"]
["Some members of this organization celebrate \"hump day\" in anticipation of \"trunk day\" a year later. Its stories include a place called Bountiful where a group builds a ship after a vision of bright white fruit on a sacred tree, and it holds that \"sons of perdition\" will exist forever in God's absence in the Outer Darkness. In 2011, these holders of sealing ceremonies commissioned a new Samoan edition of the (*) Pearl of Great Price, bundled with a text depicting the Lamanites' loss at Cumorah to the wicked, dark-skinned Nephites. Male members of this faith go on a two-year mission to tell of a sacred book on golden plates. For 10 points, name this religious sect founded in America by Joseph Smith, whose central temple is in Salt Lake City.", "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints", "H"]
["One text named for these animals is followed by \"The Family of Imran\". A murder victim in Moses's era is struck with part of a yellow one of these animals before reviving in that 286-verse-long text, whose \"Throne verse\" was exalted by Muhammad. A dream featuring seven fat ones followed by seven (*) skinny ones was interpreted as portending feast followed by famine by Joseph. The second and longest sura in the Qur'an is named for these creatures, which were struck by the fifth of the ten plagues in Egypt. The products of this ghee-producing animal cannot be worn on Yom Kippur, and Aaron requested the Israelite's earrings while Moses was on Mount Sinai to make the image of one for worship. For 10 points, name these animals which are sacred to Hindus.", "Cattle", "H"]
["It's not Judaism, but this denomination celebrates the \"Lord's Evening Meal\" ceremony on Nisan 14. It contains special members called the \"faithful and discreet slave\" class, and translates John 1:1 to read \"the Word was a god\" in its New World Translation of the Holy Scripture. Members believe in a literal government called God's Kingdom and can be punished by (*) \"disfellowshipping.\" It believes exactly 144,000 people will enter heaven. A head of this faith, Fred Franz, once predicted 1975 as the end of the world. Founded by Charles Taze Russell, this denomination prays in Kingdom Halls and publishes a magazine called The Watchtower. For 10 points, name this Christian sect whose members refuse blood transfusions and proselytize door to door.", "Jehovah's Witnesses", "H"]
["Ritual objects in this tradition include iron tools called \"warriors\" and cement images of a head with 101 names for the 101 paths he travels. Converts to this faith cover their heads and bodies in white clothes for a year. A ritual in this faith likens divine presence to the mounting of a horse. Adherents show their loyalties by the color of bead necklaces, and gather in holy houses called il\u00e9. This faith's protector of rain and (*) love, Ochun, is also called Our Lady of Charity. Like other faiths derived from the Yoruba, this faith that sued a Florida suburb venerates orishas. For 10 points, name this faith that can legally perform chicken sacrifice, an Afro-Cuban faith whose spirits are often seen as Catholic saints.", "Santer\u00eda", "H"]
["This man went straight east to claim valley land after being given a choice to go north or south, as represented by another man's left and right hands. A small force of 318 troops rescued this man, who was kidnapped by king Chedorlaomer of Elam in the chaos after five cities fought at the Vale of Siddim. This father of Ammon escaped to Zoar, where he became the ancestor of the (*) Moabites. He welcomed a pair of men into his home and watched as they blinded a mob with their angelic powers. This son of Haran was plied with wine and seduced by his own daughters after his wife looked backwards and became a pillar of salt. For 10 points, name this righteous man who escaped Sodom and Gomorrah with his uncle Abraham.", "Lot", "H"]
["This place was home to \"showbread,\" which was left continuously on a table. Both chapters of the Book of Haggai discuss this site, where a man quotes the line \"From the lips of children and infants you have ordained praise\" after children praise him, and a widow is praised for her gift of two copper coins here. Zerubabbel worked on creating this locale with the Biblical (*) Ezra. After Antiochus's defeat, a jug of oil in this place miraculously lasted eight days, and Hanukkah celebrates its rededication. For 10 points, name this holy site where Jesus drove out money-changers, whose only remaining portion is the \"Wailing Wall\" in Jerusalem.", "Second Temple", "H"]
["In Yemen, these people are called Mori. A subset of these people names the Amoraic era, which lasted seven generations after the Tanna'im passed away. They're not Islamic prophets, but one of these people argued that destroying a single life is akin to destroying the whole earth and responded to a challenger by reciting the Golden Rule standing on (*) one foot. Transcribed dialogue between these people makes up the Gemara. These people created a type of law called halakhah which is taught at yeshiva schools. Their historical examples include the creator of the Golem and Hillel; today, a cantor usually helps them at the bimah during services. For 10 points, name these learned men who lead Jewish synagogues.", "Rabbi", "H"]
["In oral tradition, this man joins Balaam and Jethro as one of Pharaoh's three advisers during the Book of Exodus. This man is the father of Keziah and Jemima. His narrative omits the Ziz in mentioning two of the Ziz's mythical counterparts. This man is confronted by the young man Elihu, and earlier he notes that he will (*) die naked, as he came from his mother's womb. This resident of Uz is asked if he can capture the Behemoth or use a fishhook to pull in the Leviathan. This man rejects the advice from Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar, who insist that he must be a sinner after his house collapses. For 10 points, name this Old Testament man who loses his possessions and family after a dispute between God and Satan.", "Job", "H"]
["A holy figure in this tradition has a snake's hood shading his head in almost all images. Its sacred texts include Agam literature. This tradition believes in an Upper, Middle, and Lower World within a roughly torso-shaped universe, and its symbols include a raised hand with a wheel on the palm. A historical founder of this faith was presaged by fourteen dreams and is symbolized by a lion. Adherents believe that humans live shorter lives by orders of magnitude as the cycle of time turns, and take (*) \"five vows.\" This religion's \"ford-builders,\" twenty-four holy figures also called tirthankaras, inspire monks who carry brooms to sweep their paths and revere Mahavira. For 10 points, name this Indian religion committed to ahimsa, or nonviolence.", "Jainism", "H"]
["This country's Muslims caused the mal\u00ea revolts. A bishop here said \"When I ask why so many people are poor, they call me a communist.\" Faiths in this country use an X in spelling holy names such as Exu and Xango. Sacred music in this home of Helder Camara and the Umbanda faith often uses a single-stringed, bow-like instrument called the berimbau. Priestesses called \"mothers-of-the-saints\" serve the syncretic (*) Candombl\u00e9 faith in this country, where descendants of slaves play sacred drumbeats alongside a type of danced kickboxing called capoeira. For 10 points, name this country whose capital holds a four-day Carnival overlooked by a statue of Christ the Redeemer, and whose majority Catholic faith was brought by Portuguese colonists.", "Brazil", "H"]
["According to one tradition, everyone in this location is 33 years old, and this place contains a pond called Kauthar. One group of people found here have transparent skin and are completely hairless except for their heads. Tradition says that this place has eight doors, one of which is designated for the punctual, and its inhabitants inclue the \"ten designated companions\". The highest rank in this place has the name \"Firdaus\". This place contains (*) rivers of wine, honey, and milk, and its inhabitants include houri, who have wide, pearl-like eyes. Conditions for entering here include following the five pillars. For 10 points, name this place where martyrs supposedly receive 72 virgins after the Day of Resurrection.", "Jannah", "H"]
["An angel supposedly rubbed this man's head with a ruby until his hair fell out. This man spent forty days on Mount Safah weeping, after which Jibril taught him how to perform ritual ablution. This figure was given the title Safiullah and was the first person given the designation of prophet. Abu Hurira narrates a Hadith in Bukhari 543 stating that this figure was 60 cubits tall, and this man spent 957 years on (*) Earth and 43 years in heaven. Iblis refused to bow to this figure, resulting in his banishment. This figure was born after Allah stated \"Be\" to a collection of clay and dust. For 10 points, name this figure whose wife Hawwa was created from his rib and who was expelled from paradise after Shaitan tempted them with the fruit of the forbidden tree, the first man in Islam", "Adem", "H"]
["According to the Jewish calendar, this is the earlier of two holidays on which the Unetannah Tokef piyyut is recited. In the days leading up to this holiday, the akeidah, chatanu, and techinah prayers are recited in the Ashkenazi tradition as their selichot prayers. One of the customs on this holiday traces its origin to the Sefer Maharil of Rabbi Molin and involves throwing bread into water to represent the casting off of sins; that tradition is called (*) tashlikh. The ba'al tekiyah performs one traditional rite on this holiday, while another tradition is to eat apples dipped in honey on this first of the Days of Awe, which involves 100 blows on the shofar. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday on the first two days of Tishrei that recently marked the beginning of the 5,774th year.", "Rosh Hashanah", "H"]
["This man was told to only keep in his army those that lapped water with their tongues like a dog. The son of this man was criticized in a story about trees trying to anoint a thorn bush; that son of this leader was later killed when a woman in Thebez threw a millstone on his head. Using earrings taken from plunder, he created an ephod that the people worshipped. This man was the father of the villainous dictator (*) Abimelech. He first attracted attention by destroying his father's altar to Baal. In order to be assured of God's promises, this person \"put out a fleece\" and asked God to keep the dew only on it, not the ground. This man's forces used trumpets in their victory over the Midianites. For 10 points, name this Biblical Judge, who lends his name to an organization that provides Bibles.", "Gideon", "H"]
["In Hinduism, this practice is used to enable religious services called Karmkand and is known as Bhiksha. In Sikhism, this practice was established based on the doctrine of Vand Chhako and is called the Dasvand. The Hebrew word for this practice translates as \"righteousness\", and Maimonides outlined eight levels of it in the (*) Hilkhot matanot aniyim of the Mishan Torah. In Islam, the nisab establishes who is eligible for this practice, and saddakah is an optional form of this practice. The fact that non-Muslims are exempt from it is the basis of the Jizya. For 10 points, name this practice, which is called Zakat in Islam and in Christianity is accomplished by passing around a collection plate.", "Vand Chhako", "H"]
["Moses Clark White helped spread this sect to China, where it built the Church of the One True God, and it was set up in another country by the Christmas Conference. Albert Outler wrote an influential work on the founder of this movement Its founder adapted upon the Pietist practice of the \"Love Feast\". The namesake of this sect argued that tradition, reason, experience, and scripture must guide reflection in his namesake (*) quadrilateral. The American church of this sect formerly observed the second half the time between Pentecost and Advent as \"kingdomtide\". This sect spread throughout the Americas due to the open-air preachings of George Whitfield in the First Great Awakening. This sect emphasizes the Arminian doctrine of free will against Calvinism. For 10 points, name this sect of Christianity based on the teaching of John Wesley", "Methodism", "H"]
["In a core text of this religion, a dying man tells his visitor to imagine the world as a large furnace and the Creator as a blacksmith. In this religion's cosmology, the heaven and earth combined are represented by the gourd, whereas the human body contains three regions known as \"cinnabar fields,\" including one in the lower abdomen that is depleted of energy any time someone masturbates. One of this religion's texts consists of Inner, Outer, and Mixed Chapters of differing authorship, and includes a bit in which its namesake expresses doubt as to whether he is (*) dreaming of a butterfly or vice versa. Another of its texts begins \"The way that can be followed is not the eternal way,\" and elucidates the principle of action through inaction, or wu wei. For 10 points, name this religion whose precepts are illustrated by the Zhuangzhi and Dao De Jing, which was written by Lao-tzu.", "Taoism", "H"]
["There is a \"triple\" type of one method to undo this procedure, which is effective immediately upon execution; another method to undo this procedure is called khula. Both of those methods require the observation of iddah for the next iteration of this action. This practice requires mehr for the procedure to be valid, and there exists some controversy over the acceptability of a type of this practice known as (*) mut'ah, which has a fixed duration. This practice, known as nikah, is permitted to be done up to four times without being broken between men of a certain religion and women who belong to the \"people of the book.\" For 10 points, name this process by which a man and woman are joined under guidelines in the Hadith and Quran.", "Islamic marriage contract", "H"]
["One figure with this name chased away the armies of Amalickah after raising the \"Title of Liberty.\" The eighth chapter of this figure's namesake book speaks out against the baptism of children. Statues of this figure are based on one created by Cyrus Edwin Dallin. This figure appeared to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, who were known as the (*) Three Witnesses. This man's people were slaughtered by the Lamanites. This figure hid the Sword of Laban on Cumorah Hill and was the last prophet of the Nephites. This supernatural figure directed a human to use the seer stones Urim and Thummim to translate, from \"reformed Egyptian,\" a pair of golden plates. For 10 points, name this supernatural figure who appeared to Joseph Smith, an angel in Mormon doctrine.", "Moroni", "H"]
["A share of this substance is taken from the father and given to the son at some weddings. The term \"homa\" or \"havan\" is used to categorize rituals using this substance. In Tamil Nadu, practitioners of the Timiti ritual show their loyalty to Draupadi by traversing through this substance. In the Navratri festival, this substance, or Jyoti, acts as a symbol of the goddess Durga. In the yajna ritual, this substance acts as an intermediary between the (*) offerer and the gods. The personification of this substance uses seven tongues to lap up ghee offered to him. This substance was also used in a now-shunned practice once commonly performed by recentlywidowed women, known as sati. For 10 points, name this substance, represented by Agni, commonly used by Hindus to cremate the deceased.", "Fire", "H"]
["One figure of this name wrote a letter on the way to his execution in Rome urging his people to let him die because there are no worldly things left for him. One figure of this name was influenced heavily by his reading of Ludolph of Saxony's De Vita Christi. With Clement of Rome and Polycarp of Smyrna, another figure with this name is one of the named Apostolic Fathers of the Church and called himself (*) theophoros. Another figure with this name was the first to hold the position of Superior General, and one of his works is divided into four \"weeks\" and teaches people how to develop the ability to discern between God and Satan; that work is a guide to meditation called the Spiritual Exercises. For 10 points, give this common name of the third Bishop of Antioch and a theologian from Loyola who founded the Jesuits.", "Ignatius", "H"]
["One theologian from this country wrote an apocryphal history in which the crucifixion of Jesus took place during the life of Alexander the Great, called the Alexandreis. One theologian that held a university post in this country was known as Doctor Irrefragibilis and standardized the use of Peter Lombard's Sentences by dividing it into distinctions. Another theologian based here is the patron of beekeepers and heavily influenced an order that returned to strict (*) Benedictine rule; that order, founded in this country, was the Cistercians. Another writer from this country attacked the casuistry of the Jesuits and supported Jansenism in his Provincial Letters. For 10 points, name this country, the home of Walter of Chatillon, Alexander of Hales, Bernard of Clairvaux and a writer who set up a namesake \"wager\" for believing in God, Blaise Pascal.", "France", "H"]
["This figure's son once told him that even his shadow is pleasing to him while asking for his inheritance. Assassination attempts on this man include one in which a boulder was rolled at him, but it only grazed his foot. He was given a name meaning \"he who achieves his goal\". This figure is said to have been born next to a sal tree while his mother was travelling to her seclusion. This man converted and preached to his companions known as the Sangha, and preached to them in the Deer (*) Park. This man preached a path between asceticism and indulgence he called \"the Middle Way\". He outlined the existence, origin, stopping, and path to stopping dukkha, or suffering, as the Four Noble Truths. For 10 points, name this Indian prince and founder of Buddhism.", "Gautama Buddha", "H"]
["In a scene in this book, the sons of Sceva are beaten to a bloody pulp by a demonic man. Later in it, the corrupt governor Felix expects a bribe from a prisoner; that prisoner is later put on trial by the more responsible governor Festus. This book contains a scene where a man notices an altar with the inscription \"TO A GOD UNKNOWN\" while walking around Mars Hill at Athens. Its final chapters describe a man sailing to (*) Rome for his trial, only to be shipwrecked on Malta. Earlier in this book, that man is blinded while on the road to Damascus. This book begins with the Holy Spirit's arrival at Pentecost and later chronicles the conversion of Saint Paul. For 10 points, name this book describing the founding of the early Christian church, a New Testament text that follows the Gospels.", "Acts of the Apostles", "M"]
["The Panj Piare were adherents of this faith whose baptism is celebrated in Baisakhi. The symbol Ik Onkar is found on this religion's scriptures. Its term for God includes the loan word \"wahi\" and means \"Wonderful Teacher.\" All females in this religion are given the last name Kaur, and it has no priestly class. This religion's Golden Temple is located in Amritsar, its holiest city, and its primary text is the Adi Granth. Upon joining the Khalsa, one must carry a kirpan, or dagger, one of the five Ks. Its followers are prohibited from cutting hair. For 10 points, name this religion, founded by Guru Nanak and centered in Punjab.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["During the ninth stanza of a fifteen-stanza song, some observers of this holiday hit each other with leeks or scallions. On the second day of this holiday, counting begins for the celebration of the harvest of the first fruits. In the tzafun of this holiday, the afikoman is eaten, and outside of Israel, it is observed for eight days, beginning with the 15th of Nisan. The youngest member at the Seder asks four questions about this holiday, on which the eating of bread is forbidden. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday that celebrates the Exodus from Egypt, during which Jews read the Haggadah and eat matzo.", "Passover", "M"]
["One possible meaning of the name for the area surrounding a building in this city is \"narrow,\" and Samaritan literature holds that this place was built by Nebaioth and his father. Travelers to this supposed location of Adam's burial ground often visit Mina, where they stone pillars representing the devil. A stone in this city is said to have been originally white but turned black from the kisses of the sinful. The Quraysh tribe worshipped Habul in this location of the Zamzam well. This destination of the Umrah includes the Masjid al-Haram, and non-Muslims are forbidden to enter. For 10 points, name this city, the birthplace of Muhammad, which all Muslims must visit.", "Mecca", "M"]
["A concept identical to this state in the Kevatta Sutta is described by Nagarjuna in the Long Discourses. A prominent figure in the Ch\u00e1n school holds that anatta, non-self doctrine, is antithetical to it. When preceded by \"pari,\" it refers to the death of one who is already in this state. Its union with samsara is bodhi in Mahayana Buddhism. In Jainism, an arhat becomes a siddha after achieving this concept, which can be translated as \"blown out,\" like a candle. The Buddha called it the \"utter extinction of aging and dying.\" For 10 points, name this state existing in various Indian religions, described in Hinduism as the feeling of bliss from being free of the cycle of reincarnation.", "Nirvana", "M"]
["In Luke 1:64, after this figure is named, his mouth is immediately \"opened and his tongue loosed: and he spoke, blessing God.\" Earlier, this figure was called by his father's name, Zechariah, and the Visitation occurred when this figure's mother, Elizabeth, met her cousin Mary. Matthew 3:4 describes how this man's \"clothes were made of camel's hair\" and how his \"food was locusts and wild honey\" because he preached in the desert. He is commonly known as the Forerunner. For 10 points, name this saint whose epithet refers to a sacrament he performed by immersing Jesus in the River Jordan.", "John the Baptist", "M"]
["The Kebra Nagast, The Promise Key, and the Holy Piby are all important works of this religion. Observers of this religion follow a diet called ital, and consumption of alcohol is discouraged. Eviston Matafale is regarded as a prophet in this religion, as is Marcus Garvey. The use of the pronoun \"I\" can refer to their chief deity, Jah. Grounation Day celebrates a visit by the former emperor of Ethiopia, Haile Selassie I, who is regarded as an incarnation of God in this religion. For 10 points, name this religion popular in Jamaica, associated with marijuana, reggae music, and Bob Marley.", "Rastafari", "M"]
["This man's father-in-law, a pharaoh, burnt down a Canaanite city as a gift to him, and his father prayed for him in Psalm 72. When he was married, Gabriel formed a sand-bank on which Rome was built. One of the books credited to him includes a chorus of the daughters of Jerusalem, and a woman, the Shulamite. This man is credited with writing the Book of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and a poem of him and his lover, Song of Songs. He settled a dispute between two women claiming to be the mother of a baby and built the first temple of Jerusalem. For 10 points, name this last king of unified Israel, the son of David.", "Solomon", "M"]
["In this book, a woman gives birth to two boys, one who \"came out red all over like a hairy garment\" and another who grasped the first one by the heel. This occurs after the mother is told that \"two nations are in thy womb.\" This book is the first to mention Shem, Japheth, and Ham, the sons of a man who is brought an olive branch by a dove. The first verse of this book's first chapter states that \"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth\" before describing Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. For 10 points, name this first book of the Old Testament.", "Book of Genesis", "M"]
["One of this religion's previous leaders stated that a Mother Wheel's contents were used to raise mountains on Earth. This religion believes that the Earth and the Moon were one, and its current leader has stated that man is stuck in an animalistic stage. Adherents of it are \"righteous teachers\" who teach the truth to those manipulated by \"slave makers.\" Founded by Wallace Fard, this religion holds that the scientist Yakub created all other races from the black race. After joining this religion, Cassius Clay was renamed Muhammad Ali. For 10 points, name this religion whose most famous members include Elijah Muhammad and Malcolm X.", "Nation of Islam", "M"]
["The 18 major vows and 46 minor ones associated with these entities and involving merit transference were described by Asanga. The sites they visit are often pilgrimage destinations, such as Putuoshan. They include Ksitigharbha, who presides over all beings in hell. The Nyingma school believes that the king path to becoming this is the lower than the boatman- or shepherd-like paths, which are not accepted in Tibetan Buddhism. Including Guanyin, associated with compassion, they go through ten bhumis, or stages, on their way to becoming a buddha. For 10 points, name these beings in Buddhism, who remain in the world to help others achieve enlightenment.", "Bodhisattva", "E"]
["One controversial quote ascribed to this figure gives his approval to Lat, Uzza , and Manat. This member of the Quraysh tribe's sayings are collected as hadith. This nephew of Abu Talib embarked on a Hijra [heezh-rah] to (*) Medina from Mecca. His revelation in the Cave of Hira came from the angel Jibreel, and led him to found a religion based on submission to Allah. Sunnis forbid visual depictions of, for 10 points, what primary prophet of Islam?", "Abu al-Qasim Muhammad ibn Abbad", "E"]
["Prominent structures in this city were destroyed by Titus on a site thought to be Mount Moriah. This city contains the Cenacle [SEH-nah-kull], the original site of Maundy, and al-Aqsa Mosque. A tunnel in this city reveals sections of the (*) Western Wall, a feature of the Temple Mount. Palm Sunday, Muhammad's Night Journey, and the binding of Isaac are memorialized in, for 10 points, this middle-eastern city that is holy to most Abrahamic religions.", "Jerusalem", "E"]
["The Gathas are hymns written by the founder of this religion. A guide against evil spirits of this religion is the Vendidad, which is interpreted in the Zend along with other sections of the Avesta, this religion's most sacred text. Adherents of this religion worship in (*) fire temples. The conflict between Angra Mainyu and Ahura Mazda is central to, for 10 points, what ancient Persian religion founded by the subject of Nieztche's Also Sprach Zarathustra?", "Zoroastrianism", "E"]
["In this work, one man sends the escaped slave Onesimus back to his owner in Colosse. A story in this work likens the tongue to a ship's rudder, and another compares salvation to a \"Pearl of Great Price.\" One man wrote, (*) \"Love is patient, love is kind,\" to the Corinthians in this work, in which Jesus turns water into wine. For 10 points, name this section of the Bible which contains the Epistles and the Gospels.", "New Testament", "E"]
["The Upanishads describe this concept as bitter fruit being eaten by a bird. In Jainism, this concept is compared to dirt that is attracted to one's soul, and is divided into \"harming\" and \"non-harming\" types. This concept is contrasted with (*) fate, since it is created by humans' choices, and this concept drives the cycle of rebirth in Buddhism. For 10 points, name this concept in Indian religion, in which positive actions yield positive results.", "Karma", "E"]
["This man wore a veil when his face was shining with God's glory after he descended from a mountain, and was the brother of a prophetess who sang \"horse and rider, [God] has thrown them into the sea.\" He fled to Midian after killing an (*) Egyptian; when he returned, his brother, Aaron, helped him ask Pharaoh for the Israelites' freedom. For 10 points, name this man, who parted the Red Sea.", "Moses", "E"]
["The Hadith of Gabriel outlines this set of acts. Wudu occurs prior to reciting the kalima in order to satisfy the \"prayer\" requirement of these practices. Mandatory almsgiving is one of these acts called (*) Zakat and one portion of these acts commands Sawm, fasting during Ramadan. It also mandates the Hajj, a pilgrimage to Mecca. For 10 points, name this set of rules that Muslims must follow.", "Five Pillars of Islam", "E"]
["This ritual was first performed by a priest of Melchizedek with objects of \"Affliction\" and \"Blessing,\" and was later administered at \"love feasts.\" This ritual can be given with the Anaphora, and includes a description of \"the (*) night He was betrayed.\" In this sacrament, transubstantiation changes the elements of the Last Supper into the body and blood of Jesus. For 10 points, name this holy sacrament, in which Christians consume blessed bread and wine.", "", "E"]
["Compassion, moderation and humility are the Three Treasures of this religion, and its concept of \"naturalness\" is represented by an uncut wood block. The Three Pure Ones are elderly deities in this religion, which emphasizes (*) wu-wei, or \"action through inaction.\" This religion's supreme god is the Jade Emperor. Founded by Lao Tzu [lah-oh tzoo], for 10 points, name this Chinese religion, whose primary text is the Tao Te Ching [tah-oh tay ching], or Book of the Way.", "Taoism", "E"]
["At the end of this holiday's service, drinking songs like \"Had Gadya\" are sung, and earlier \"Dayenu\" [\"dye\"-AY-noo] is recited. At that service, the youngest person present asks why observers recline as part of the (*) Four Questions. Observers of this holiday spill ten drops of wine--one for each plague--from the four cups of wine they drink, and they also eat unleavened bread called matzah. For 10 points, name this holiday celebrating the exodus of the Israelites from Egypt.", "Passover", "M"]
["This site was home to a scary-ass snake who regularly terrified locals until being snatched by a bird, shortly before a group of men plunged their hands into vats of blood during a work stoppage here. In a divination ritual at this site, arrows were thrown at the feet of a statue of Hubal. Four leaders grasped corners of a cloak to resolve a construction project dispute at this site, around which a 20-mile perimeter banning violence was traditionally observed. This site is covered by the kiswa and lies near a shrine encasing the footprint of Abraham, who supposedly built it with his son. This subject of the \u1e6daw\u0101f lies west of the Zamzam Well in the Masjid al-\u1e24ar\u0101m, and is home to the Black Stone. Circled seven times during the \u1e25ajj, for 10 points, name this cuboid building in Mecca and holiest site in Islam.", "Kaaba", "M"]
["Ernest Renan famously remarked that if Christianity had been halted by some mortal illness, then this would have been the dominant religion in the world. Initiation into this religion involved tying one's hands with chicken intestines then hopping over pools of water. In this religion, a \"courier of the sun\" called a heliodrome and a lion symbolized by the planet Jupiter are two of its seven grades. This henotheistic religion venerated a deity that was born from a rock with dagger in hand, possibly sometime around Christmas. This religion's main act of sacrifice was a tauroctony or slaying of a bull, which took place in a namesake cave. For 10 points, identify this mystery religion of the Roman Empire, named for a Persian deity.", "Mithraism", "M"]
["The attendant of one of these figures rides an eagle and is named Chakreshvari. Another of these figures, believed by some to be the only female one, once filled a statue of herself with rotting food in order to drive away potential suitors. The penultimate one is attended by Padm\u0101vat\u012b and is often depicted under the shade of a snake's hood. The first of these figures was Ri\u1e63abha, who was the king of Ayodhy\u0101. They are depicted either in the k\u0101y\u014dtsarga posture or the lotus position, and are said to have achieved Kevala J\u00f1\u0101na. The last of these figures was born Prince Vardham\u0101na and attained nirv\u0101\u1e47a in Pawapuri. For 10 points, name these enlightened figures of Jainism, the last of whom was Mah\u0101v\u012bra.", "Tirthankara", "M"]
["Jan Nattier has argued that the earliest version of this text was composed in Chinese; that hypothesis is supported by the existence of commentaries by the disciples of Xu\u00e1nz\u00e0ng and textual similarities between this text and a larger work often attributed to N\u0101g\u0101rjuna. This text begins with a figure who embodies compassion recognizing that human existence is no more than emptiness. The longer version of this text is used by Tibetans, and contains framing text that sees the words of its speaker confirmed by the Buddha. In this text, Avalokite\u015bvara explains to \u015a\u0101riputra that those who attain enlightenment rely only on the Perfection of Wisdom, a phrase that is sometimes appended to the title of this text. Ending with the mantra \"gat\u00e9 gat\u00e9 p\u0101ragat\u00e9 p\u0101rasa\u1e43gat\u00e9 Bodhi sv\u0101h\u0101,\" this is, for 10 points, what text that plays a central role in Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhism along with the Lotus and Diamond s\u016btras?", "Prajnaparamita", "M"]
["Some observers of this holiday recite the ushpizin prayer, symbolically welcoming seven female guests along with the seven shepherds of Israel. It was the first holiday observed after resuming sacrifices in Jerusalem after the Babylonian Captivity. Although it is not Passover, the Ya'aleh v'Yavo prayer is recited on its days referred to as Chol ha-Mo'ed. On final day of this holiday, Hoshana Rabbah, observers beat the ground with five willow branches after circling a synagogue seven times with a lulav and etrog. Beginning on the 15th of Tishrei, this holiday is immediately followed by Shemini Atzeret, and it entails building booths covered by s'chach. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday that follows Yom Kippur, also known as the Feast of the Tabernacles.", "Sukkot", "M"]
["One thinker who wrote about the principles of this religion supposedly explained to a king the meaning of the sword of a commoner, the sword of a feudal lord and the sword of an emperor, thus causing every swordsman to commit suicide in that kingdom. That thinker illustrated the principles of this religion by engaging in a debate with a man about what makes a fish happy. One story states that the founder of this religion stayed in his mother's womb for 81 years and was born with white hair. That man wrote its main text after a gatekeeper asked him to list 5,000 sayings that summarize his teachings. The inability to fully grasp the nature of reality caused one thinker who believed in this religion to ponder whether he was himself or a butterfly. For 10 points, Zhu\u0101ngz\u01d0 and L\u01ceoz\u01d0 were thinkers associated with what Chinese religion?", "Taoism", "M"]
["The author of this work discusses his plans to travel to Spain in order to preach, stopping by a certain city along the way. Its sixteenth chapter references Tertius, who transcribed the work for its author. Its second chapter claims that a Jew is led to salvation not by circumcision but by his faith. Unlike twelve similar works, it was written to a city its author had never visited. A commentary on this work was written by Karl Barth This book refutes the idea that we should \"go on sinning so that grace may increase,\" stating that we were crucified with Christ and are now dead to sin. It states that \"the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life\" and that \"all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.\" For 10 points, identify this book of the New Testament preceding First Corinthians and succeeding Acts, an epistle written by Paul to an Italian city.", "Epistle to the Romans", "M"]
["The purposes of this practice are enumerated in the 60th ayah of the Surah at-Tawbah, which indicates that it can be performed for the benefit of \"those whose hearts it is necessary to conciliate.\" A specific form of this practice takes place mandatorily between sunset on the last day of Ramadan and the beginning of the Eid prayer. A criterion used to determine who must perform this practice is called nisab. Related practices include khums, which is practiced by the Twelvers, and a voluntary practice known as sadaqah. Its name means \"purification\" in Arabic. An equivalent of this practice required of non-Muslims in Muslim states is known as jizya. For 10 points, name this Pillar of Islam which involves the giving of alms as a form of tax.", "Zakat", "M"]
["Alexander Kohut laid out the principles of change by \"total popular will\" in this movement, which spread its message through the Occident newspaper. Amy Eilberg was a pioneering female leader in this group, and its founder established Maimonides College. Many of the early leaders in this movement were part of the \"Historical School\" that built on the teachings of Zechariah Frankel. Although this movement did not write the Pittsburgh Platform, its origins are sometimes traced to the so-called \"trefa banquet\" at a university in Cincinnati that led to a dispute over kashrut. Cyrus Adler founded this group's influential Theological Seminary. Its founder, Isaac Leeser, was forced to resign from Philadelphia's Mikveh Israel Synagogue after translating Sephardic rites into English. More liberal members of this group split into the Reconstructionist movement. For 10 points, name this branch of Judaism, sometimes held to be the \"middle way\" between Reform and Orthodox.", "Conservative Judaism", "M"]
["This work is the source of the controversial line, \"Don't we have the right to take a believing wife along with us, as do the other apostles and the Lord's brothers,\" and mentions that little yeast leavens a whole batch of dough when chiding its addressees. This text notes that the author \"laid a foundation as a wise builder, and someone else is building on it.\" This text discusses the question of women wearing head-coverings in church among matters pertaining to women, and the author draws a distinction between prophesying and speaking in tongues. The fifteenth section of this text recounts those who saw Jesus after the resurrection, and this book is the source of the phrase \"through a glass, darkly.\" Containing the lines \"When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child,\" and \"Love is patient, love is kind,\" for 10 points, name this Pauline epistle addressed to a Greek city.", "First Epistle to the Corinthians", "M"]
["In the Parable of the Unjust Judge, this type of person bothers the unjust judge until he gives into the request. Jesus resurrected the son of a person of this type from Nain, and as an infant Jesus encountered a prophetess named Anna who had been a person of this type for many years. The fifth chapter of Paul's first letter to Timothy says that nobody under the age of sixty should be included on a list of this type of person. The first resurrection in the Bible was done to the son of a person of this type whose flour and oil Elijah miraculously caused to last longer than it should; that person of this type was from Zarephath. Jesus commended the meager monetary offering of a woman of this type, saying that \"she out of her poverty has put in all she had to live on.\" For 10 points, give this word for a woman whose husband has died.", "Widow", "M"]
["A book written by the founder of this group includes a section titled \"The New Commandments,\" which details the renting of goods for periods of forty-nine years and advocates the need for a common language and currency. This group was founded following an encounter at either Puy de Lassolas or Puy de la Vache, which was related in The Book Which Tells The Truth. The official symbol of this group is a swastika embedded in the Star of David. Ideas put forth by the founder of this group include economic humanitarianism and geniocracy. One organization associated with this group is headed up by Brigitte Boisselier and came under fire after it claimed that it had cloned a human baby. Followers of this faith believe that humans arose through DNA manipulation by a race of beings known as the Elohim. For 10 points, name this UFO religion founded in 1974 by Claude Vorilhon.", "Ra\u00eblism", "M"]
["An extra-canonical source states that when this man was trying to ascend to heaven, a different apostle opposed him by praying to God, which caused this man to fall to earth. According to Pseudo-Clement, this man copulated with a personification of the divine Ennoia, a female essence that was reincarnated variously as a prostitute from Tyre and Helen of Troy. This man supposedly wrote The Great Declaration, which became the basis for his namesake Gnostic sect. Roman sources state that this man was called \"the Favored One\" or Faustus, possibly inspiring the Faust legend. This man was a Samaritan who was baptized by Philip the Evangelist after he made a decision to convert to Christianity. He supposedly had the power to levitate, which partially explains why he is called the father of all heresies. For 10 points, identify this religious figure whose magical powers led him to be called a \"Magus.\"", "Simon Magus", "M"]
["Numerologists are fond of noting that there are this many generations between Adam and Noah, and this many between Noah and Abraham. The Beast in the Book of Revelation has seven heads and this many horns. In a parable found only in the Book of Matthew, a group of this many virgins carry lamps as they await a bridegroom. In Judaism, the term minyan refers to the requirement that this many Jews be present for prayer. In Kabbalah, the Sephirot are a series of this many emanations. The 'Aseret Yemei Teshuva is a period sometimes known as this many days of repentance and lasts from Rosh Hashanah to the end of Yom Kippur. This is the number of Lost Tribes of Israel and the number of plagues Moses brought down on the Egyptians. For 10 points, name this number which is also the number of Commandments.", "10 (number)", "H"]
["This figure is the addressee of the Sub Tuum Praesidium, and this character is also the namesake of the Chicago Mosque which is the headquarters of the Nation of Islam. This figure's Solemnity is celebrated on the first of January in some churches. In the Quran this figure's father is said to be Imran, and this figure's namesake surah recounts the ministry of Zachariah and the birth of (*) John the Baptist. In one New Testament passage, this person communicates \"They have no wine.\" The Dormition of this figure in many traditions is contrasted with the Catholic feast of the Assumption, and she is the only woman mentioned by name in the Quran. For 10 points, name this figure whom Catholics revere as the product of an Immaculate Conception and a perpetual Virgin, the mother of Jesus.", "Mary", "H"]
["This figure was approved by the Holy See in the papel brief Non Est Equidem, and devotion to the shrine to this figure was encouraged by the Church after the temple to Tonantzin was destroyed in the same site. In a story found in the Nican Mopohua, the image of this figure was revealed to Juan de Zumarraga after roses fell off of a tilma cloak of the peasant (*) Juan Diego, who had seen a mestiza apparition of this figure. A massive pilgrimage, sometimes performed on the knees, to the basilica of this figure occurs every year on December 12, during which musicians perform the song \"Las Ma\u00f1anitas\" and participants carry representations of this figure until they reach Tepeyac Hill. For 10 points, name this \"Patroness of the Americas,\" an icon of the Virgin Mary especially revered in Mexico.", "Our Lady of Guadalupe", "H"]
["This character once captured a garrison at Geba with a thousand men, and in another instance this man and his armor bearer single-handedly slaughtered twenty Philistines. This man was nearly put to death upon consuming honey and unknowingly violating a command of fasting issued by his father. While covering for his best friend, this brother of Malchi-shua and Ish-bosheth was called \"a (*) son of a perverse, rebellious woman\" by his father. This figure then told a servant boy \"The arrows are beyond you,\" in order to warn that friend of Saul's treachery. After this man's death in a battle on Mount Gilboa, his best friend showed kindness to his crippled son Mephibosheth. For 10 points, name this Biblical prince featured in 1 Samuel, a son of Saul who was King David's best friend.", "Jonathan", "H"]
["This person is said to have died in the wilderness of Zin at Kadesh. At Hazeroth, God uses the analogy of a father spitting in someone's face to explain why this figure is sent into the wilderness as unclean for seven days, after being punished for speaking out about a Cushite woman by becoming \"like one stillborn\" and \"white as snow\" with (*) leprosy. This figure plays a tambourine and leads a group of women in singing a follow-up to a poem that praises God's \"right hand\" for defeating \"horse and rider,\" the Song of the Sea. In her first appearance, this prophetess and daughter of Amram fetches her mother Jochebed as a nurse for Pharaoh's daughter after she finds the papyrus basket holding her baby brother in the Nile. For 10 points, name this sister of Aaron and Moses.", "Miriam", "H"]
["One \"Forest Tradition\" of this sect included such luminaries as Mun Bhuridatta and his student Ajahn Chah. Some adherents of this school observe a holiday in which they accept instruction from any of their peers; that Pavarana ceremony is followed by the Kathina festival, in which laypeople offer gifts, and it comes at the end of the three-month Vassa season, also called the Rains Retreat. This denomination includes four stages of (*) enlightenment, the highest of which is the Arahant. Its monastic orders, known as nikaya, are made up of bhikkhu and bhikkuni who follow the rules of the Vinaya to enter into the larger monastic community, called the Sangha. The Vinaya and Sutta sections make up two of the three \"baskets\" of this sect's main text, the Pali Canon, and its name means \"teaching of the elders.\" For 10 points, name this religion prevalent in Southeast Asia that is distinct from Mahayana Buddhism.", "Theravada", "H"]
["The palm frond is the symbol of one of these entities that is married to Atisou, the patron of trees. Besides Ayizan, a different example of these beings is alternately known as \"The Tadpole in the Pond,\" Agoueh. Another of these beings is married to a rainbow serpent, (*) Ayida Weddo, and is considered a primordial creator god of the sky, Damballa. One family of these beings embodied the powers of fertility and death and included Masaka and Nibo, the Ghede. These beings act as intermediaries between Bondye and humanity, and one prominent example of them is known for his top hat and work at the crossroads. For 10 points, name these deities, including Papa Legba and Baron Samedi, which exist in Voodoo.", "Loa", "H"]
["In the Book of Enoch, this character travels to the desert of Dudael in order to perform the first scapegoat ritual on Azazel. This character is usually identified with the emisssary who descended into the pool of Bethesda in John 5. An Islamic equivalent to this character takes the place of Gabriel in sounding the trumpet of judgment day from Jerusalem. In one passage, he disguises himself as (*) \"Azarias the son of Ananias.\" Depictions of him with a fish refer to his instructions to use a fish's gallbladder in another appearance, where he saves Sarah from the demon Asmodeus and heals the blindness of Tobit. For 10 points, name this archangel, the equivalent to the Islamic Israfil.", "Rafael", "H"]
["Scholars in both Egypt and Saudi Arabia have suggested that one method of acquiring this substance is a sharia\u2010appropriate way around prohibitions on intergender work environments, and suggest providing it in offices to allow women to work. One method of obtaining this substance causes the prohibition known as \"rada,\" as those who acquire its namesake \"kinship\" in Islam may never (*) marry. In Judaism, some strict interpretations of kashrut ordain that, to ensure it is not mixed with non\u2010kosher varieties, this substance is kosher only if it is acquired under Jewish supervision, creating a kind of it known as \"cholev Yisrael.\" For 10 points, name this substance, which legendarily flows in Israel alongside honey, and is acquired from the holy animal of Hinduism.", "Milk", "H"]
["This man questioned who can define what is meat and what is plant after having his cook grill him a deer during a solar eclipse. As a child, this man impressed his teachers by explaining the symbolism of the first letter of the alphabet, but later caused a stir when he refused to accept a traditional symbolic string. This man once hid a dish of food under a (*) sheet and made it look like a corpse, then asked his sons to eat it; when they both refused, he blessed the man who did with the ang and declared him to be part of his body. When this man died, his corpse turned into flowers, and he was succeeded by Angad. For 10 points, name this man who said \"there is no Hindu, there is no Muslim,\" the first guru of Sikhism.", "Guru Nanak", "H"]
["This man prophesized that Zebulun would live on this shore of the sea, and said that Issachar is a \"large-boned ass.\" This man received his wages in spotted, speckled, and brown goats and sheep, and he bred them to make himself wealthy. One of this man's best known visions occurred while en route to Haran at a place he later renamed (*) Bethel. One of this man's wives took a Teraphim from the house of Laban when they fled with their family during the night. He worked for fourteen years to pay for both his brides because he was tricked into taking Leah instead of Rachel. For 10 points, identify this third Hebrew patriarch who wrestled with an Angel and saw a namesake ladder to heaven.", "Jacob", "H"]
["For Lutherans, this act's process it outlined in the \"Office of Keys\" of the Small Catechism, and is sometimes accomplished through a vote from the congregation, while Quakers go about this act by having the subjects \"read out of meeting.\" The Islamic version of this action is usually practiced through the courts, ends with a subject being labeled a kafir, and is known as takfir, and in Judaism this action is known as Cherem, although it is rarely practiced anymore. Drawing from a line in the Book of Matthew which declares that a sinner who (*) ignores the church should be treated as a \"gentile and tax collector,\" this action is referred to as disfellowshipment by Jehovah's Witnesses and results in shunning in many Anabaptist communities. For 10 points, name this religious action which in Catholic and Orthodox churches often results in banning a worshipper from taking sacraments, the deprivement of membership in a religious community.", "Excommunication", "H"]
["The founder of this faith was the author of the recently discovered Book of Heracleides. That founder controversially stated that God wasn't \"two or three months old\" and \"the creature hath not given birth to the uncreatable.\" Members of this faith relocated to the territory of the Sassanids where it was led by such figures as Mar Aba I and Babai the Great. A missionary of this faith named Alopen was received by (*) Chinese emperor Taizong. This faith was denounced at a council called at the behest of Cyril of Alexandria. Adherents to this heresy called Mary \"Christotokos\" rather than \"Theotokos,\" and this heresy held that the divine and human aspects of Christ were in synapheia, or conjunction. For 10 points, name this Christian heresy condemned at the First Council of Ephesus.", "Nestorianism", "H"]
["Klijn and Reinink have argued the attribution of this practice by Philastrius to the Montanists is responsible for its attribution to the Cerinthians in Asia Minor, and John Chrysostom attributed this practice, which involved a man lying beneath a bed, to Marcionites. One possible reference to this practice in the Bible is the much-disputed 1 Corinthians 15:29, which hinges on the meaning of the preposition \"hyper.\" This practice requires acceptance from the recipient to be valid, and it has been compared with a similar practice of (*) \"sealings. \" One group's performance of this practice on Holocaust victims has elicited controversy. For 10 points, name this practice, common in Mormonism, in which another person receives a certain sacrament on behalf of a person no longer living.", "Baptism for the dead", "H"]
["In this modern-day country, aristocratic scions were devoted to the Buddha Miruk while learning Five Precepts for Laity at the \"Way of Flower Youth\" school. In the fifteenth century, seven schools of Buddhism in this country were outlawed, leaving only the \"doctrinal\" and \"meditational\" schools. In the twentieth century, its Association for the Study of Buddha-Dharma, or Won, attracted many popular adherents, though academics tended to stay in the Chogye school. This country's theologians offer a synthesis known as \"interpenetrated Buddhism,\" and its recent leaders have converted many Buddhist temples into vacation resorts or museums as Christianity has become the plurality religion here. For 10 points, name this country whose independence leaders often painted Buddhism as a tool of Japanese colonization, and where the Unification Church was founded.", "South Korea", "H"]
["This character's father lured a snake with a white lamb, then killed it by offering it a bowl filled with poisonous sap to slake its thirst. This character broke a promise not to steal anything by reaching for some water after being fed a particularly spicy meal. In another source, this character hailed from a sun-worshiping state, and is instructed to walk on a floor polished like glass, which displays the reflection of her cloven foot, a feature she has because her mother had sex with a goat. The Kebra Nagast describes how this woman's son brought the Ark of the Covenant to his kingdom. Also known as Makeda, this woman is best known for testing her lover with hard questions, then exchanging gifts with him. For 10 points, name this woman who originated the Ethiopian royal line by conceiving a child with King Solomon, to whose court she journeyed.", "Queen of Sheba", "H"]
["In 2011, this religious group's Canadian branch withdrew from its worldwide body over plans to open membership to women and people outside of professional occupations. This organization was the subject of 1993's Berger v. Rensselaer case. It was founded by William Knights, Samuel Hill, and John Nicholson in Janesville, Wisconsin in 1899 after the three repeatedly met each other on their sales routes. Products from this group are color-coded by audience, including white versions for medical workers and red versions for schools. A pitcher with two handles and a torch is the logo of this organization, in allusion to its namesake's victory over the Midianites. For 10 points, name this Protestant society that has placed over a billion Bibles in hotel rooms.", "Gideons International", "H"]
["The body of law on this topic includes a prohibition deriving from a metaphor in Song of Solomon 2:14, which claims that certain voices constitute \"ervah.\" One part of the law on this topic places a thirty-second time limit on particular people occupying an elevator together, and generally deals with who may be \"secluded\" or \"yichud.\" The people who follow the laws of this kind which apply to actions such as shaking hands are known as \"shomer negiah.\" A controversial part of the law on this topic is the use of a mechitza, or partition, between certain areas of a synagogue. Major parts of the law on this topic are the use of a wig or snood to cover the hair and the wearing of long sleeves year-round. For 10 points, identify this section of Jewish law, known in Hebrew as \"tzniut,\" which addresses outward manifestations of humility, especially by mandating conservative dress.", "Haredi Judaism", "H"]
["A prayer regarding this substance asks that it be \"considered ownerless as the dust of the earth\" and is known as \"bittul,\" and it is also burned in the \"bi'ur\" ritual. Controversy exists over whether certain items that become wet during use, known as \"gebrochts,\" should be treated as this category of substance. In the \"bedikat\" process, a candle, a wooden spoon, and a feather are used to search for this substance. This substance may be sold en masse for period of time in a form of \"mechirah.\" \"Kitniyot\" are treated as this category by Ashkenazim, and include rice, lentils, and corn. For 10 points, give this term for species of spelt, barley, and wheat which are prohibited to Jews during Passover in all forms except matzah.", "Chametz", "H"]
["This theologian dubbed himself a \"boundary man\" for his attempts to synthesize old and new viewpoints, and he wrote a major book divided into five parts in which different types of questions are answered by the members of the Trinity, revelation, and the Kingdom of God. An early academic paper by this man contains his view that sin and redemption have consequences beyond humanity and actually alter the cosmos, and is his \"Mysticism and Consciousness of Guilt in Schelling's Philosophical Development.\" With the aid of his mentor Martin K\u00e4hler, this man extended the doctrine of justification through faith to a wide-ranging \"Protestant principle,\" and he used the \"method of correlation\" in his Systematic Theology. For 10 points, name this Christian existentialist who called himself the \"apostle to the skeptics\" for writing the popular theological tracts Dynamics of Faith and The Courage to Be.", "Paul Tillich", "H"]
["Some hadiths place this act alongside removing armpit hair and maintaining fingernails on the list of five acts of \"fitra.\" Other hadiths claim that \"the Earth cries out in anguish\" upon receiving the urine of those who have not performed this act. One justification for this action is to emulate Mohammed, who was born without needing to perform this action, or Abraham, who did this action at age eighty. This action is performed near the time of puberty among Muslims in Southeast Asia, but usually earlier in Arab countries. For 10 points, name this practice observed by the vast majority of Muslims, which is the same thing that is performed at a Jewish \"bris\" ceremony.", "Circumcision", "H"]
["In some areas, a text recited at this event asks that several aspects of nature be \"honey-sweet\" while holding a cup containing honey and butter. Another ritual often performed at this event involves using the toes to touch seven betel nuts to a quantity of rice. At this event, water is sprinkled in honor of the pole star and the sun, and an \"auspicious thread\" is tied around the neck of one participant. This event is one of the few modern survivals of the Vedic \"yajna\" ritual. It is formalized when the saptapadi is performed, involving walking seven times around the fire dedicated to Agni. For 10 points, identify this event in Hinduism which also includes the \"kanya daan,\" or \"giving away\" of the bride.", "Hindu wedding", "H"]
["In one speech with this name, a man claims that he would have waited and kept quiet so long as the question was a new one. In that speech with this name, the speaker cautions against believing that one man's power is god-like, since he is in fact hated by those who are devoted to him. According to that speech, one city would be unable to capture even Amphipolis. Another set of speeches with this name discusses a letter sent to Aulus Hirtius along with many references to the siege at Mutina. A set of speeches with this name failed after the Second Triumvirate was formed, which led to their deliverer being executed and placed on display in the Forum. A set of four speeches with this name were delivered against the father of Alexander the Great by Demosthenes. For 10 points, Cicero's speeches against Marc Anthony were given what name?", "Philippic", "H"]
["A person born in this book is named for a word meaning \"traveler\" by a father who observes \"I have been a stranger in a strange land.\" In one incident in this book, a man \"looked this way and that way\" before intervening to stop a killing and hiding the dead body of the murderer in the sand. In one part of this book, a curtain is woven from goats' hair for an object that is built by Bezaleel and Aholiab. Earlier, several magicians are defeated in a contest, and a \"stiffnecked people\" are made to drink a mixture of molten metal. A major character in this book married Tzipporah after fleeing to live with Jethro, years after being followed by Miriam when he was set afloat to defy an order killing all male newborns. For 10 points, name this book of the Bible in which the Ten Commandments are given at Mount Sinai to Moses, following the departure of the Israelites from Egypt.", "Book of Exodus", "H"]
["A \"faskh\" decree can be given to implement this procedure against the will of a person involved. Many regulations on this procedure are found in a book of 87 relevant hadiths collected by Sahih Bukhari. A mandated length of time immediately following this procedure is marked by three menstrual cycles and is known as \"iddah.\" The \"khula\" form of this procedure usually involves returning the \"mahr,\" which has often proved unenforceable in American courts. The more common form of this procedure involves saying the \"talaq\" up to three times. For 10 points, identify this practice in Islam which allows a woman to subsequently remarry.", "Divorce in Islam", "H"]
["In Islam, this son of Nun is equated to Abu Bakr for their similar ascents to leadership. This man ordered the deaths of Achan and his family after the failed Battle of Ai because Achan had held onto loot from a previous battle. Along with Caleb, this figure was one of two (*) spies to Canaan who argued for an immediate conquest, which resulted in his being allowed to enter the Promised Land. He marched around a city once a day for six days and seven times on the seventh day before blowing horns, at which point the walls of that city, Jericho, fell. For 10 points, name this post-Moses leader of the Israelites who conquered Canaan.", "Joshua", "H"]
["In Islam, this son of Nun is equated to Abu Bakr for their similar ascents to leadership. This man ordered the deaths of Achan and his family after the failed Battle of Ai because Achan had held onto loot from a previous battle. Along with Caleb, this figure was one of two (*) spies to Canaan who argued for an immediate conquest, which resulted in his being allowed to enter the Promised Land. He marched around a city once a day for six days and seven times on the seventh day before blowing horns, at which point the walls of that city, Jericho, fell. For 10 points, name this post-Moses leader of the Israelites who conquered Canaan.", "Joshua", "H"]
["One form of this practice was pioneered by a student of Matsyendranatha named Gorakhnath, who founded a religious order known for wearing large earrings. The Self-Realization Fellowship was one of the first Western schools to emphasize this practice. Along with Nyaya, Vaishesika, Mimamsa, Vedanta and Shankhya, it is one of the six darshans in Hinduism. An ista-devata is used by practitioners of the (*) bhakti form of this practice. The fifth of the eight stages in this practice is pratyahara, which involves intense concentration in preparation for later meditation. The Asana stage in this practice consists of a series of physical exercises. For 10 points, name this Hindu practice, co-opted by white people into a form of exercise.", "Yoga", "H"]
["In Lurianic Kabbalah, the three highest sefiroth radiates from the head of a figure with this name. That figure, called Kadmon, is contrasted with another figure of this name called HaRishon. Orson Pratt attacked the earily Mormon belief that this figure was the parent of Jesus, and in the Mormon Doctrines and Covenants, the archangel Michael is this figure before he enters mortal existence. Paul calls Jesus a (*) \"new\" version of this figure in First Corinthians. This husband of Lilith names all the animals presented to him, but when none prove to be a suitable companion God forms a new being from his rib. For 10 points, give this name of the husband of Eve and the first created man in the Bible.", "Adam", "H"]
["The angel of the Lord refuses to disclose this man's name to his mother because \"it is too wonderful.\" Gazites try to kill this figure while he stays with a prostitute, but he sneaks away at midnight. The wife of this son of Manoah coaxes him into revealing the explanation to a (*) riddle, the answer of which refers to the lion filled with honey he kills at the vineyards of Timnah. This figure later claims that using fresh bowstrings and weaving seven locks will break his power, leading to his death between the pillars of the temple of Dagon. For 10 points, name this biblical Judge who kills a thousand men with the jawbone of an ass, drawing on super strength from hair later cut by Delilah.", "Samson", "H"]
["This idea can be divided into apophatic and kataphatic varieties depending on whether it can be explained concretely. William James' The Varieties of Religious Experience asks if saintly life originates from this idea and states that \"ineffability\" is a prerequisite for a tradition to adhere to it. This idea underlies a tradition whose practitioners attempt to merge the (*) Godhead with the Einsof. It underlies a different tradition that uses various practices to achieve the Six Subtleties as well as fana. That group also emulates the motion of planets through the practice of whirling, fostering this experience by proxy. For 10 points, name this human experience of the transcendent divine that characterizes sects like Kabbalah and Sufism.", "Mysticism", "H"]
["The apocryphal text \"Apocalypse of the Blessed Virgin\" sees Mary ask this figure about all human knowledge. This figure's epithet in Catholic doctrine, \"Fortitudo Dei,\" refers to his role in incarnation and consolation. He appears as a traveler and questions another figure on facets of faith like ihsan and zakat in his namesake hadith. This figure advised Ibrahim to pass by several towns before deciding on (*) Mecca as the site of the Kaaba. During the \"Night of Destiny,\" this figure was relayed an entire text from the highest to the lowest of the seventh heavens, whereupon he relayed it over time to its mortal messenger. For 10 points, name this angel who narrated the Quran to Muhammad.", "Gabriel", "H"]
["L. Ron Hubbard claimed to be this figure in his poem \"Hymn of Asia.\" The Chinese empress Wu Zetian justified her seizure of power by proclaimed herself an incarnation of this deity. This deity imparted his Five Treatises to Asanga, one of the founders of the Yogacara school, while waiting in the (*) Tushita Heaven for the time when he will reintroduce the Dharma to the world after it has been long forgotten. He is sometimes depicted as the fat and smiling monk Budai, though his physical body is many times larger than a human's. Eschewing tantra recitation, he will instruct a retinue of 84,000 monks when the world is ruled by Shankha. For 10 points, name the bodhisattva who is prophesied to appear on Earth as the successor to the historical Buddha.", "Maitreya", "H"]
["Jains accomplish this action by using the pratikramana prayer on the final day of the festival Paryushana. Karl Seidl's fruitless attempt at this action on his deathbed led Simon Weisenthal to write The Sunflower. Islam holds that this process is futile for idol worshippers, and Muslims accomplish it by ending their prayers with the phrase astaghfirullah. In the Book of Luke, Jesus performs this action on (*) behalf of his people by telling God, \"they know not what they do.\" Two lines that engage in this action precede a request to \"lead us not to temptation\" in the \"Our Father\" prayer. For 10 points, name this religious practice of seeking reconciliation for possible sins or offenses, which often involves a promise to improve oneself.", "Kshamavani", "H"]
["An apocryphal book of the Tanakh, The Book of Jasher, states the judges Serak and Sharkad caused this event by erecting beds on top of rotting bodies. This event was preceded by the Apparition at Mamre. One figure at this event was told to \"stay at a servant's house\" where he could \"wash his feet.\" That figure would later leave with a group of followers to the town of (*) Zoar. Prior to this event, a crowd formed to rape two angelic guests disguised as travelers. One character attempted to find \"ten good people\" to prevent this event. Looking back at this event, an unnamed woman turned into a pillar of salt. For 10 points, identify this event from the Book of Genesis where Lot escaped from the \"sulfur that engulfed two sinful cities.\"", "The Destruction of Sodom And Gomorrah", "H"]
["Morton Smith claimed to have found evidence for a \"Secret\" version of this work described in the letters of Clement of Alexandria. That work, possibly a forgery, purports to explain a scene in this work where a young man wearing only a linen cloth is seized but able to escape by leaving the garment and fleeing naked. William Wrede wrote about the motif of the Messianic Secret in this work. This work also includes a parable in which the (*) Kingdom of God is compared to a mustard seed. The Farrer hypothesis asserts the priority of this work as the solution to the synoptic problem, and the two-source hypothesis places it alongside Q as a source for the other synoptic Gospels. For 10 points, name this second and shortest of the Gospels, found between Matthew and Luke.", "Gospel of Mark", "H"]
["This action creates the necessity of using a siwaak, whose ideal size, flexibility, and frequent use are explicitly delineated in the Quran. The \"law of necessity\" in Surat al-Baqarah principally concerns this activity, and, like chaste women, its central materials may be provided by Dhimmi. This is the most recognizable activity halted when white and black threads become distinguishable. This activity is regulated by the opening of Surat al-Ma'ida, which places restrictions on this action for those (*) substances which are raffled with arrows, sacrificed on an altar, suffered a violent death, or attended to by carrion. The term \"halal\" is most often used in regard to, for 10 points, what action which is done after sunset during Ramadan?", "Sherman's Lagoon", "H"]
["In some regions, this holiday is celebrated by boys making human pyramids to reach a pot of buttermilk, which is then broken. In one country, this holiday is called Fagu Poornima. The Konkani incorporate this holiday as part of Sigmo. This holiday is ended by Rangapanchami, and in some regions, it is commemorated with a one-week festival called (*) Ganga Mela. It is celebrated on the last full moon day of the month of Phalguna. During this holiday, the sister of Hiranyakashyap is burned in effigy. This holiday celebrates Narasimha's rescue of Prahlada from being burnt alive. For 10 points, name this Hindu spring festival in which bonfires are lit and colored water and powder is thrown.", "Holi", "H"]
["In this book, a Levite's concubine is raped to death and her corpse cut into twelve pieces. A woman named Jael in this work drives a tent peg through the head of an enemy commander named Sisera, denying another Israelite the honor of killing him. One character in this work kills his virgin daughter and gets embroiled in a conflict between the (*) Gileadites and the Ephraimites; that character's name is Jephthah. A more famous character in this book eats honey from the carcass of a lion, and has his eyes gouged out by the Philistines after being tricked into getting his hair cut by his lover Delilah. For 10 points, name this seventh book of the Bible about a series of Jewish leaders including Gideon, Deborah, and Samson.", "Book of Judges", "H"]
["This book describes an army of two-thousand youths who each get injured in battle but all survive. Another passage in this book has led to speculation about the nature of animals called the \"curelom\" and \"cumom.\" This book describes the \"Sons of Helaman\" and warns against \"secret combinations\" like the Gadianton robbers. It tells of how the Jaredites built barges to cross the ocean in its section the Book of (*) Ether. Another group described in this book follows a compass-like instrument called the \"Liahona\" which is held by the prophet Lehi. This best known of the \"standard works\" was attested in western New York on gold plates. For 10 points, name this text discovered by Joseph Smith, a foundational sacred text of the Church of Latter Day Saints.", "Book of Mormon", "M"]
["The beginning of this holiday sees the worship of the cow in remembrance King Prithu's milking of the earth. This festival commemorates Yama's visit to Yami by having brothers bring their sisters gifts. Occurring over the last days of Ashvin and the beginning of Kartika, this holiday celebrates the release of Guru Hargobind and is known as Bandi Chhor Divas in Sikhism. The fourth day of this festival celebrates the emergence of the goddess of wealth from the churning of the ocean, and on that day lamps called diyas are lit. For 10 points, name this Hindu holiday that celebrates the return of Rama after his defeat of Ravana, sometimes known as the Festival of Lights.", "Diwali", "M"]
["Pashur ben Immer had this man beaten and then imprisoned in the Upper Gate of Benjamin, after which he doubted his ability to speak God's word. The false prophet Hananiah once broke a yoke of wood resting on this man's neck, and this figure was called to the ministry one year after Manasseh's grandson Josiah began suppressing idolatry in Judah. This advisor to King Zedekiah and native of Anathoth was released by Nebuchadnezzar after the Babylonian invasion and he wrote the Book of Lamentations with his scribe Baruch. For 10 points, name this Old Testament prophet who also wrote 1st and 2nd Kings as well as his namesake book, which comes after Isaiah.", "Jeremiah", "M"]
["This figure defeated Sihon of Heshbon and King Og at the Battles of Jahaz and Edrei, respectively. After hearing news of this man's army, Balak asked Balaam to curse it. At Meribah this father of Gershom and Eliezer lived up to his name by drawing water out of a rock. After saving the seven shepherdess daughters of Jethro in Midian, this man was given Zipporah in marriage. When he was a baby, this man's sister placed him in a basket of rushes and set him adrift on a river, and when he was older he found a burning bush that spoke to him. This man also notably turned the Nile in to blood and parted the Red Sea. For 10 points, name this man who led the Jews from Egypt in the Exodus.", "Moses", "M"]
["The korbanot that takes place on this day is described in detail in the Musaf prayer at the Avodah service given by the High Priest. During evening prayers on this day, married men wear a white robe called a kittel. On the eve of this holiday, celebrators recite in Aramaic the renouncement of all personal vows made during the coming year. The entirety of the Book of Jonah is read during this holiday, after which a recitation of the Shema Yisrael concludes the evening services. The Kol Nidre is recited during this holiday, whose five prohibitions include the wearing of leather shoes. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday observed on the 10th of Tishrei, known as the Day of Atonement.", "Yom Kippur", "M"]
["One figure in this book, known only as Ploni Almoni, invalidates his Levirate marriage through the rite of Halizah. In another episode from this book, a man places six measures of grain in a woman's shawl upon meeting her at the threshing floor. In this book, the deaths of Elimelek and his two sons results in their wives moving to Bethlehem and participating in a barley harvest. Traditionally studied on the Jewish holiday of Shavuot, this book follows the title daughter-in-law of Naomi as she remarries and conceives Obed with her second husband Boaz. For 10 points, name this book of the Old Testament about the great-grandmother of David, which comes immediately after Judges.", "Book of Ruth", "M"]
["One early edition of this text is the Codex Bezae, which is named for Theodore Beza . One version of this book, translated by William Whittingham, was supposedly denounced at the Hampton Court Conference. Nicholas of Hereford helped the Lollard leader, John Wycliffe, translate this book into English. Another version of this text was compiled from Erasmus' Received Text by William Tyndale. Coming in an Authorized Version, this book was translated into the Vulgate by St. Jerome. Martin Luther's translation of this book included the Apocrypha. For 10 points, name this religious text that comes in a King James Version.", "Bible", "M"]
["The Book of Nehemiah describes how the public form of this ritual was instituted by Ezra after the Babylonian Captivity. A celebration called Simchat follows the conclusion of an annual cycle involving this ritual, and involves circling a synagogue seven times with its central object. During this ritual, the titles kohen and levi are given to participants in the first aliyah, which involves giving blessings before and after doing this. That object is referred to with the word Sefer and is kept on two scrolls with forty-two lines written in each column. For 10 points, name this ritual in which Jews recite the first five books of the Bible, which include Numbers and Leviticus.", "Torah reading", "M"]
["An unnamed servant in this book gives a gold nose-ring as a gift to a maiden who fetched water for his camels. In this book, God closes the wombs of all women in the household of the king of Gerar, Abimelech. A woman in this book presents a seal, cord, and staff as items belonging to the man who impregnated her, and is named Tamar. This book includes an episode in which a ram found tangled in a bush is sacrificed instead of an innocent boy, an event that occurs shortly after the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. The first part of this book describes the murder of Abel by Cain and the eating of the forbidden fruit. For 10 points, name this first book of the Bible.", "Genesis", "M"]
["One of these texts describes how to awaken the compassionate Avalokiteshvara through meditation, a process called Prajnaparamita. Many of these texts begin with the phrase \"Thus have I heard,\" including one that is framed as Subhuti's question being answered by the Buddha. That text is also called the Vajra Cutter. Another one of these texts important to the Tendai and Nichiren schools is titled after a flower. For 10 points, name these texts central to Hinduism and Buddhism that include the Heart, Diamond, and Lotus ones, as well as one about sexuality named for Kama.", "Sutra", "M"]
["The initiates of this faith are called The Knowers, or uqqal, and they are the only ones with access to this religion's holy texts, The Instruction. Although this religion eschews ritual and ceremony, its adherents revere the tombs of Sabalan and Jethro as holy sites. Founded during the caliphate of al-Hakim, this faith is symbolized by a five-pointed star of green, yellow, red, white, and blue. After a feud with the Maronite Christians, many members of this faith moved to Mt. Hauran in Syria. For 10 points, identify this monotheistic religion that grew out of Islam and is practiced in Israel, Lebanon, and Syria.", "Druze", "M"]
["The fourth chapter of this text is called the Sundara Kanda and is traditionally read first. One figure in this text undergoes the \"Test of Fire\" to prove her purity, but is later banished before giving birth to Lava and Kusha. Another figure in this text cannot identify an herb needed to save Lakshmana, so he brings an entire mountain to him. The protagonist of this work is exiled for fourteen years after his father promises to grant his wife any wish, and Hanuman helps him rescue his wife Sita from the rakshasa Ravana. For 10 points, name this major Sanskrit epic that depicts the life of the namesake seventh avatar of Vishnu.", "Ramayana", "H"]
["In chapter 5 of this work, the governor of Trans-Euphrates, Tattenai, sends a letter asking Darius to search for a decree of Cyrus, who had given Sheshbazzar various articles from the temple of Babylon. The title figure fasts near the Ahava Canal and refuses to ask for horses and soldiers in order to carry out his work, and prior to this, the title figure prays to God about the intermarriage between the Israelites and the neighboring peoples, prompting a period of confession among his people, who had been working to reconstruct the city that had been destroyed during the Babylonian captivity. In this work, the title figure receives permission from Artaxerxes I to rebuild Jerusalem and its temples. For 10 points, name this book of the Old Testament that was traditionally combined with Nehemiah.", "Book of Ezra", "H"]
["The place where this man had his first religious experience is home to the six \"Witness Trees\", which are old enough to have been there when it happened. That place is called the Sacred Grove. During another experience, this man heard the voices of the apostles Peter, James, and John in the woods, announcing the re-establishment of the Melchizedek Priesthood. In another event, this man and a companion saw a man descend from heaven and anoint them before introducing himself as John the Baptist. In this man's first vision, both God and Jesus appeared and told him that all existing churches were wrong. In this man's most famous vision, he was told that the Sword of Laban was on Cumorah Hill by the angel Moroni, who also spoke of gold plates. For 10 points, name this prophet of Mormonism.", "Joseph Smith", "H"]
["One dispute over this practice is whether or not sifaat can be a basis for it. This practice's name literally translates as well-traveled road. Examples of how to perform this practice have been collected in texts called sirat. One example of this practice is performing zakat for at least three people in each of the eight categories of beneficiaries. According to tradition, the Caliph Umar stated that he only kissed the black stone of the kabbah because he was following this practice. This practice is justified by Quran verses such as \"in the messenger of God you have a good example\", and ways of following this practice can often be learned from hadiths. For 10 points, name this Islamic practice of imitating the customs and habits of Mohammad, which gives its name to the largest branch of Islam.", "Sunnah", "H"]
["Qi the Opener was born of one of these items that came into being when his father turned into a bear and frightened his mother. A magical one named Alatyr is guarded by Gagana and Garafena on the Booyan in Russian legends. In Irish mythology, one of these named Lia Fail roars for joy when it is in the presence of the rightful king. Sun Wukong, the Monkey King, was born from an egg of this substance, and Zeus resolved the dilemma of Laelaps and the Teumessian fox by turning each animal into one of these. These items were the \"mother's bones\" which, when thrown by Pyrrha and Deucalion, turned into women and men. Rhea tricked Cronus into swallowing one of these items instead of Zeus. For 10 points, name this substance that people turned into when they were gazed upon by Medusa.", "Rock (geology)", "H"]
["Among the ancient Hebrews, this substance contained something called kaneh bosem, whose exact identity is the subject of debate, but which some claim is cannabis. In Chapter 30 of Exodus, God instructs Moses on how to make this substance, after which it is used in the Tabernacle. Eastern Christian churches refer to this substance as myron. In the Catholic Church, this substance is blessed once a year on Holy Thursday, the celebration of the Last Supper. Catholics store this substance in a container called an ambry and use it during the sacraments of Holy Orders and Confirmation. The Torah forbids the use of this substance on any person except the sons of Aaron. For 10 points, name this substance used in Judaism and Christianity to anoint priests and kings.", "Holy oil", "H"]
["These people obtain food through a ritual called Gochari, which they compare to the grazing of a cow because it involves going from door to door and taking a small amount from each household. These people are forbidden from going to barbers, but instead have a ritual called loch in which they pluck out their hair on the annual holiday of Paryushan. This group of people is the last to be mentioned in a prayer called the Namokar Mantra. Some members of this group use a cloth called the Pangarani, which is draped across the upper body, and a loincloth called the Cholapattak, both of which are white, while other members reject these and prefer to be \"sky-clad\", or naked. For 10 points, name these members of the Jain religion who have taken vows.", "Jain monasticism", "H"]
["According to one story, this man scoffed at collection of his sayings by stating \"there is nothing I said within this book\", pointing out that they came from God. Late in his life, this man was a harsh critic of Jacob Frank and his followers, the Frankists. This man's teachings were recorded by his student, Jacob Joseph of Polonoy. This man's warning of \"Amalek is still alive today\" suggested that skepticism of God was the enemy of all Jews. This man's rejection of asceticism came from his belief that all things in the material world must possess some good, because life and the entire universe is a manifestation of god. This man's followers, who are contrasted with the Talmudists, are divided into dynasties led by a Rebbe, the largest of which was formed in Lubavitch and is called Chabad. For 10 points, name this founder of Hasidic Judaism.", "Baal Shem Tov", "H"]
["The coming of this holiday is sometimes announced by a man wearing blackface and bright red clothes. A form of ceremonial cleaning called \"the shaking of the house\" may be performed prior to this ceremony. The lighting of a bonfire is traditionally done on the last Wednesday before this holiday. This holiday takes place six months prior to the comparable feast of Mehregan. In ancient art, this holiday was sometimes depicted as an eternal struggle between a bull and a lion. During this holiday, apples, wheat, vinegar, and other objects are placed on top of a table to create the haft sin setting. Bowls of water containing goldfish are a common symbol of this holiday. This holiday takes place at the spring equinox and unlike others described in the Avesta was not abolished after the coming of Islam. For 10 points, name this Zoroastrian holiday still celebrated as the Persian New Year.", "Nowruz", "H"]
["An artifact called the Taylor Prism, now at the British museum, contains an account of a military campaign against this ruler, and boasts that 46 of this ruler's walled cities were captured. This king's treasurer was named Eliakim, who replaced the disgraced minister Shebna. This man's mother was Queen Abijah, and he is credited with destroying the Nehushtan. Biblical prophecies about the coming of \"Emanuel\" may be a reference to this man's birth. This man built the Siloam Tunnel to serve as an underground aqueduct. This man's son reversed his religious policies and may have executed the prophet Isaiah; that son is Manasseh. This king is also famous for surviving Sennacherib's Assyrian siege of Jerusalem. For 10 points, name this reformist king of Judea, who cleared the temple of pagan idols and restored monotheism.", "Hezekiah", "H"]
["Members of this faith used the term \"living from water and wood\" to refer to their practice of eating only vegetables and fish. Once a month, members of this faith confessed their sins in public in a ritual called \"Apparelhamentum\". Members of this faith going off to battle would be kissed twice by a cleric in a ritual called \"convenza\", this faith's equivalent of Extreme Unction. This faith's most sacred ritual, called \"consolation\", was believed to remove all sin and elevated the participant to the rank of \"perfect\", this faith's only form of clergy. This faith's practice of \"endura\" may have been a form of ritual suicide by starvation designed to hasten one's arrival in heaven. This faith was condemned by St. Dominic of Osma, the founder of the Dominicans, and may have been inspired by Paulicianism and Bogomilism, two previous dualistic theologies. For 10 points, name this Christian heresy from southern France, the target of several crusades.", "Catharism", "H"]
["Members of this faith believe in koasasa, or occasional human reincarnations of divine beings. Followers of this religion sing orally-transmitted hymns called qawls, which are the primary source of their beliefs. In the 20th century, this religion's views were written down in two books, the Black Book and the Book of Revelation. This religion believes in the Heptad, a group of seven divine beings created by God, commonly translated as angels. The practice of fertilizing crops with human waste led to this religion's infamous ban on eating lettuce. The most prominent figure in this religion, Melek Taus, is called the peacock angel. Members of this faith are persecuted by Muslims because of a common belief that this faith is Satanic. For 10 points, name this mystical religion found among Kurds in northern Iraq.", "Yazidis", "H"]
["While this figure was playing as a child, a heavenly spirit joined his game and turned into a monster, but this man remained unphased, earning his most common name. Due to the prosperity he created in his parent's kingdom while still in the womb, this man was first named Vardaman. In a famous episode of suffering, this figure would be bitten by the serpent, Chandakaushik. This man's mother Trishala was a notable follower of Lord Parshvanath, but this figure added a fifth Great Vow to Parshvanath's four. The most famous Ganadharas were followers of this man. For ten points, name this figure known by Svetmbaras and Digambaras alike as the twenty fourth tirthankar of Jainism", "Mahavira", "H"]
["One figure with this name was a member of the Tribe of Dan who was appointed priest of an idolatrous shrine in the story of Micah's Idol. Another figure with this name was nicknamed \"Apphus\", or \"the diplomat\". The most famous figure with this name had a crippled son named Mephiboshet and was once called the \"son of a perverse and rebellious woman\" who \"shames his mother's nakedness\" by his father. That figure with this name was tragically killed on Mount Gilboa and was credited with giving \"love more wonderful than the love of women\" by warning a certain warrior that King Saul wanted to kill him. For 10 points, give this name held by a son of King Saul who was the best friend and possible homosexual love of King David.", "Jonathan", "H"]
["The preface to this work discusses Nataraja's eight-armed dancing style, utilized to make patriarchs cower in his presence. In one episode of this work, two men arguing over a cat see a third man cut it in half, while another features a man who cremates a fox that lived 500 lives. An epilogue was written to this known as the Caveats, meant to challenge duality and causation, and it makes a reference to the Tao-te Ching in discussing a wheel without spokes.One notable parable from this composition shows Maha-kashapa become enlightened after Sakyamuni holds out a lotus flower. This text was compiled for use at the Soaring Dragon monastary by its author, Wumen. It opens by telling the story of a master who is twice asked if a dog has a soul, and gives different answers each time, one of 48 apparent paradoxes for students to meditate on. For 10 points, name this collection of 48 koans, a central text of Zen Buddhism.", "The Gateless Gate", "H"]
["This book remarks on the death of John the Baptist by lamenting, \"what inconvience comes from wanton dancing.\" The first edition of this book contained a letter to Queen Elizabeth which exhorted her to be like Josiah. King James reportedly denounced this book at the end of the Hampton Court Conference. One portion of this book equates the anti-Christ with the Pope, and the New Testament of this Bible was translated by William Whittingham. The Bishops' Bible was created in response to this text. This text was the translation used by Shakespeare and was the first to divide the Bible into chapters and verses. For 10 points, name this 1560 English Bible, known for its \"Calvinist\" annotations, which was supplanted by the King James Version and which is named for the Swiss town it was translated in.", "Geneva Bible", "H"]
["This man's autobiographical poem is called Bachitar Natak. This man adopted a hermit from Nander, Banda Bahadar, as a slave and conducted the ritual of amrit chhakhana on his followers. The Rahit Maryada is a code of discipline which likely came from the teachings of this man, whose poetry includes an epic concerning gods and demons, Chandi Di Var. According to one story, this man once tested the loyalty of his men by using goat blood to fake executions. After his death, his followers met at Akal Takhat in Amritsar and eventually split into two groups, the Bandai Khalsa and the Tat Khalsa. After this son of Teg Bahadur surrendered himself to Aurengzeb, he refused to name a human successor. For 10 points, name this man who appointed the Adi Granth the eleventh guru of Sikhism upon his death.", "Guru Gobind Singh", "H"]
["This site is responsible for a ceremony replacing a rope that weighs over a ton that joins the \"wedded rocks,\" which are located in a nearby sea. Each October 15, this site is home to a harvest ritual in which the first crops of the year and a five-colored silk cloth are offered to a deity. One area at this site is an empty lot with a \"sacred central pole.\" The central building of this site consists of a heavy gabled roof with logs crossing the top and is built entirely from cypress. This site consists of an Outer and Inner complex, the latter of which is called Naiku, is accessible via the Uji Bridge, and supposedly contains the Sacred Mirror. For 10 points, name this site whose buildings are torn down and rebuilt on alternating sites every twenty years, the holiest shrine in Shintoism, which is dedicated to Amaterasu.", "Ise Grand Shrine", "H"]
["An example of this religion's poetry can be found in the works of the Mar Ammo. Members of this religion were classified into two groups: the auditors and the elect. This religion celebrated a festival called the Bema, during which a pulpit was built and decorated with rich cloth. Illustrations of this religion's concepts could be found in a picture book called the Arzhang. The sayings of this religion's founder were collected in a text called the Kephalaia of the Teacher. This religion uses the term \"abortions\" to describe fallen angels, leading to the common misunderstanding that its creation myth involves raining fetuses. The founder of this faith was persecuted and flayed alive by King Bahram after having been tolerated by Shapur I. For 10 points, name this religion once followed and later denounced by St. Augustine, which focused on the struggle between good and evil.", "Manichaeism", "H"]
["Under Islamic law, this process may be performed by any \"person of the book\", which may include Jews and Christians, but they must still perform this process while facing Mecca and pronouncing the name of Allah. That Islamic version of this process is called Dhabihah. According to Jewish law, this process must be followed by the process of nikkur, which removes chelev. Jewish law also requires this process to be performed with a tool called a hallaf, lists five forbidden techniques for this process, including pressing, pausing, and piercing, and requires that a portion of the proceeds from this activity be given to a kohen. Islamic and Jewish law generally agrees that drugging and electrocution cannot be used in this process, which has led traditional versions of this process to be banned in parts of Europe. For 10 points, name this process that according to both halal and kosher rules must begin with a cut to the throat, the first step in turning animals into delicious meat.", "Animal slaughter", "H"]
["The speaker in this book notes that even if the physical structure of a tabernacle is destroyed, the building of God still remains, then talks about being naked without that building of God, leading up to the obvious sounding statement \"If so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked.\" In another section, the speaker asks of a victimized group \"Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I\" and details such abuses against his person as \"Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep.\" The last section states that it is now the third visit to the title people, to whom the speaker wrote \"the letter of tears\" immediately prior to this work. This work was coauthored by \"Timothy our brother\" and is the sequel to a work that contains the phrase \"through a glass darkly\" and \"\"When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things.\" For 10 points, name this final epistle by Paul to a church in Greece.", "Second Epistle to the Corinthians", "H"]
["The shishi form of this ritual draws inspiration from a Chinese ceremony where one person pretends to be a lion. Priests from Atsuta will travel to villages to perform a type of this ritual designed to drive out demons. Gagaku is used in conjunction with a version of this ritual that is performed once a year in the imperial household. During this ritual, an invitation to the gods is offered in the kanjou. This ritual was first performed by women called miko, who were attached to shrines and allegedly descended from the gods. First described in the Kojiki, this ritual commemorates the attempts by Ame-no-Uzume to lure Amaterasu out of a cave. For 10 points, name this form of ritual dance of the kami of Shinto.", "Kagura", "H"]
["This man gives an extensive sermon about a sword while sighing deeply to represent the future sadness of the people. God orders him to pack his bags and pretend to be leaving his city. He always faces south when he preaches. After shaving his head, this man burns a third of his hair, chops a third, and scatters a third of it into the wind. After building a small model of Jerusalem, he lies on his side next to it for 410 days to represent the length of Babylon's siege of Jerusalem. This man's stunts, such as eating a prophetic scroll, are seen as desperate attempts to warn an unheeding people that Nebuchadnezzar would destroy Israel. This man's other prophecies include an image of Gog and Magog and a vision of a valley of bones. For 10 points, name this Old Testament prophet whose namesake book is between the Books of Lamentations and Daniel and who witnesses a vision of God in a fiery chariot guided by cherubim.", "Ezekiel", "H"]
["This man quoted the First Epistle of John to begin his Discourse on the Reformation of Inner Man. One defense of this man made the distinction between de jure and de facto meanings to argue that his opponents misread this man's ideas despite their exact wording. This man was the subject of Unigenitus and In eminenti. His accusation that the Church had turned towards Semipelagianism was restated among five propositions of this man which were condemned in the papal bull Cum Occasione. Defenders of this non-Calvin proponent of \"efficacious grace\" used to gather in the abbey Port-Royal; they included Antoine Arnauld and the pseudonymous Louis de Montalte. For 10 points, name this author of the Augustinus, a bishop of Ypres whose teachings were defended in the eighteen Provincial Letters of his follower Blaise Pascal.", "Cornelius Jansen", "H"]
["This deity, whose chief weapon is concupiscence, lapsed into unconsciousness for three thousand years, after which he created a primal whore named Jeh, who is responsible for women having menstrual cycles. This god is given nine thousand years to rule after he rips open his mother's womb to claim his kingship. In Pahlavi texts, this deity's name is often seen written upside down. This god, who was said to have created nine hundred ninety-nine diseases to plague the planet, created six daevas, thus creating horror in the world. In response to the creation of the stars in the sky, this god brought forth the destructive dragon Azi Dahaka. This son of Zurvan does not appear in the Gathas as a proper name. For 10 points, name this brother of Ahura Mazda who is the personification of evil in Zoroastrianism.", "Angra Mainyu", "H"]
["An unauthentic hadith written by al-Zuhri is one of a few broken-chained or weak hadiths in which Muhammad contemplates this action. The Christian doctrine regarding this action originates from St. Augustine's denunciation of the Donatists, who sacrilegiously honored those who had undergone it. After a woman throws a millstone at his head, Abimelech performs it. Jewish doctrine regarding this action is based on Genesis 9:5. The councils of Arles and Braga forbade burial of people who have performed this action. This action is performed by the armor-bearer of Saul and by Saul himself, but the Bible does not specifically condemn it as a sin. For 10 points, name this frowned-upon action in Judaeo-Christian religion whose prohibition applies the commandment of \"thou shalt not kill\" to oneself.", "Suicide", "H"]
["In one neat ritual from this religion, a floormat is painted with a map of the stars and the practitioner \"paces the void\" from star to star. Attaining immortality in this religion can be done by closing your eyes and matching the sun to your heart and matching the moon to your kidneys to absorb their essence. In this religion the root of a human being is said to reside in the \"lower cinnabar field,\" in contrast with the brain, which is the seat of the soul and is called the \"Muddy Pellet.\" The central deities in this religion are known as the Three Pure Ones. An \"uncut block\" is used as a metaphor for a state of always doing what is natural also known as \"action without action\" or wu wei. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Laozi, whose name literally translates as the \"way\".", "Taoism", "H"]
["One portion that is read from this book is Pinchas, which describes how Phineas ended a plague upon his people by skewering a Jewish man and his Midianite lover while they were having sex. In one portion of this book, the lepers are cast out and husbands are instructed to bring forth the tenth part of a barley meal as a sacrifice for a trial of jealousy. This book sees the dispatch of the twelve spies to Canaan, resulting in the Israelite's punishment when only two report that the land is flowing with milk and honey. In yet another scene in this book, Joshua is appointed as the successor of Moses. It begins with the census of the Israelite people that gives it its name. For 10 points, name this fourth book of the Old Testament, which comes after Leviticus.", "Book of Numbers", "H"]
["The 1997 documentary A Life Apart dealt with the growing issue of incest between members of this religion, whose followers celebrate a holiday in which a Mashpia sings hymns at the Farbrengen community gathering. Members of this religion also celebrate a holiday in which people gather at a central court known as a Hoyf, and observe the leading-up to that day known as the Three Weeks. Its founder was known as the \"Master of the Name,\" whose sayings were collected in a text that taught members of this religion on how to become a Tzadik. Communities who mostly make up members of this branch read from public boards known as Pashkvilim. A sub-branch of this religion is known as Chabad-Lubavitch. For 10 points, identify this spiritual branch of Orthodox Judaism which was founded in Eastern Europe by the Bal Shem Tov.", "Hasidic Judaism", "H"]
["People sing hymns between the chanting of verses from this text during the first part of the Eastern Orthodox service on Holy Saturday. Its speaker says that he has \"become like a bottle in the smoke\" and his soul \"fainteth for thy salvation, but I hope in thy word.\" Along with the Parable of the Wise and Foolish Virgins, this text inspired the Eastern Orthodox practice of the \"Midnight Office.\" It begins with a verse sometimes translated as \"Happy are those whose way is perfect,\" which appears in the section titled \"Aleph.\" This text, which contains one stanza for each letter of the Hebrew alphabet, contains a pair of verses which read \"It is better to take refuge in the Lord than to trust in humans. It is better to take refuge in the Lord than to trust in princes.\" Those verses are regarded as the center of the Protestant Bible. For 10 points, name this longest chapter in the Bible, a Psalm.", "Psalm 119", "H"]
["In order to examine the security of performing this act, the super tuto meeting is held. This act, which starts with the postulator-general appointing a vice-postulator, involves creating increasingly more complex positiones after several rounds of dubium. It creates an obligatory cultus through either a definitive \"formal\" process or an \"equivalent\" one, both of which require evidence of dunamis, semeion, and teras. The constitution \"Divinus Perfectionis Magister,\" promulgated by John Paul II, lays down the procedure for this action, which is slightly different for confessors than it is for martyrs. This process begins five years after the subject's death and requires two posthumous miracles in order to clear the beatification stage. For 10 points, name this act by which the Catholic church recognizes a saint.", "Canonization", "H"]
["This figure once guaranteed that a king's family would rule for seven generations when that king offered him some cannabis, but he condemned wine when a priest offered him some. He refused to join a man in prayer because he could tell that the man was not praying, but rather thinking about a baby horse that might fall into a well. A poisonous cobra protected this man from sunlight when he was herding buffalo as a child. In his youth, he impressed a teacher by comparing God's nature to the first letter of the alphabet. This subject of the Janamsakhis preached that \"God is everywhere\" to explain why he slept with his feet toward the Kaaba. This man's teachings are followed through kirat karo, vand chakko, and naam japna. Because he believed that \"there is no Hindu, there is no Muslim,\" he chose to follow God's path. For 10 points, name this first guru of Sikhism.", "Guru Nanak", "H"]
["Garfield T Heywood led a branch of this denomination which rejected trinitarianism and was founded in Eureka Springs. North Bonnie Brae street was the base of one early form of this denomination, an offshoot of which was created by Durham and known as the Finished Work. Joseph Smale was inspired by the Welsh revival to adopt many of the practices of this denomination, which was partly founded by the efforts of William Seymore in the Azusa Street Revival. This denomination places heavy emphasis on \"spiritual gifts\" given by the Holy Spirit, whose presence in Acts 2:4 is used to justify the practice of glossolalia. It takes its name from a feast that occurs 50 days after Easter. For 10 points, name this charismatic branch of Christianity which practices speaking in tongues and faith healing.", "Pentecostalism", "H"]
["One preacher of this faith died of breast cancer after she received a brooch as a token of affection from the convert Queen Marie of Romania. One practice in this faith is a voluntary donation of 19% of one's excess wealth to the head of this faith, an act known as \"the Right of God.\" The announcement that there would be no other prophet for one thousand years was made on the first day of a twelve-day holy period observed in April and May by its devotees. Nine verses are written above nine entrances to the nine-sided places of worship in this faith, including Delhi's Lotus Temple. This religion, which observes the festival of Ridvan, is governed by an institution in Haifa established at the end of a Ten Year Crusade launched by Shoghi Effendi. The Universal House of Justice is the seat of, for 10 points, what religion rooted in the Book of Certitude, which was founded in Persia by Baha'ullah?", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["This person hears the word \"ne'um\" more than any other character in the Bible. He relates the apprehension caused by God's wrath by saying \"He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret places.\" This person goes to a rock crevice in Pareth to hide a completely dry linen belt, which God tells him is symbolic of the binding of Israel to its covenant. This native of the village of Anatoth serves the \"five kings\" after first being called to ministry during the reign of Josiah. He describes a widow crying every night after exclaiming \"How! How is this possible\" in one book and witnesses a potter shaping a clay bowl in another. Nebuchadnezzar authorized the release of this prophet, the purported author of 1 and 2 Kings. For 10 points, name this second major prophet, who recounted the destruction of the Second Temple in Lamentations.", "Jeremiah", "H"]
["One chapter of a book specific to this sect recounts a story about a man who gets stung by the evil eye after seeing a shooting star blaze through the sky. This sect forbade the construction of tombs in burial sites and consider many doctrines developed during the \"state of ignorance\" to be nothing more than \"reprehensible innovations.\" Some members of this school deem as \"bid'a\" the usage of prayer beads, probably because of the garish ebony prayer beads used by sultans. Soldiers of this sect formed a national guard called the Ikhwan, united against such idolatries celebrating the birthday of the Prophet. They emphasize the absolute oneness of God, or Tawhid, call themselves Unitarians, and revolted against the Ottomans after being united by their 18th century founder. For 10 points, name this Muslim movement to return to the roots of early Islam, considered to be the root of Islamic fundamentalism.", "One chapter of a book specific to this sect recounts a story about a man who gets stung by the evil eye after seeing a shooting star blaze through the sky. This sect forbade the construction of tombs in burial sites and consider many doctrines developed during the \"state of ignorance\" to be nothing more than \"reprehensible innovations.\" Some members of this school deem as \"bid'a\" the usage of prayer beads, probably because of the garish ebony prayer beads used by sultans. Soldiers of this sect formed a national guard called the Ikhwan, united against such idolatries celebrating the birthday of the Prophet. They emphasize the absolute oneness of God,", "H"]
["A fake quote from this book was used as the epigraph for Jean Baudrillard's book Simulacra and Simulation. The contents of this book are divided into words that prod the reader's thinking and words that anchor the reader's lives, respectively known as \"goads\" and \"nails.\" This book is read on the Sabbath of Sukkot, except when Shemini Atzeret falls on that day. This book, which closes with exhortations to keep the Commandments and to fear God, has a Hebrew name suggesting the speaker at an assembly. It asks \"What profit has a man from all his labor in which he toils under the sun?\" after decrying, \"Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.\" Also known as Qoheleth, for 10 points, name this Biblical book that proclaims \"To everything there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven\" and other such aphorisms.", "Ecclesiastes", "H"]
["This man instructs a listener to go to Rachel's tomb, where two men will inform him that two missing donkeys have been found. A resident of Ramah in the land of Zuph, this man is identified as the son of Elkanah. He came to power when his predecessor died after hearing that the Ark of the Covenant had been captured and that all his sons had died in battle. As a ghost, this man predicts a horrific defeat when he is summoned by the Witch of Endor. He is conceived when his barren mother Hannah goes to a temple and is blessed by the prophet Eli. The namesake of two Old Testament books, this man crushes the Philistines at Mizpah before anointing both the first and second kings of the Israelites. For 10 points, name this Old Testament prophet and judge, an advisor to Saul and David.", "Samuel", "H"]
["One character in this book curses a bunch of ambassadors to be \"hewers of wood and drawers of water\" for the House of God. Another character in this book is stoned to death along with his entire family and livestock for pilfering gold, silver, and expensive clothing from Babylon during a failed expedition against the kingdom of Ai, which is conquered on the second try. The sun and the moon are commanded to stay still during the siege of the Gibeonites in this book, which includes the circumcision of all born in the desert. In this book, the title character's army recognizes a red cord hanging from the window of a woman who hid two spies sent to snoop around Canaan. After an army marches around a city seven times blowing their trumpets in this book, its walls fall. For 10 points, name this book in which the prostitute Rahab facilitates the conquest of Jericho, the sixth in the Old Testament.", "Book of Joshua", "H"]
["Chapter 8 of this book promises that \"Height nor depth nor any other creature shall separate us from the love of God.\" Sections of this book detail the unrighteousness of Gentiles who are aware of God, and claims that the most righteous circumcision is a circumcision of the heart in a section about the salvation of righteous Jews. Anti-Semitic attempts to read one verse of this book as condemning \"the hypocrisy of the Jew\" have thankfully been thwarted by good scholarship. Luther referred to chapter 3, verse 28 of this book to justify his doctrine of \"salvation by faith alone.\" The author of this book intended to journey to Spain in order to evangelize, but the journey would necessitate his passing through the title city. For 10 points, name this epistle of Paul written to the inhabitants of a certain Italian city.", "And death shall have no dominion", "H"]
["Immediately before this holiday, the defeat of the tyrant Nikanor is celebrated and three halves of the local coin are offered to the poor on a minor fast day. The founder of Der Sturmer, Julius Streicher, made a sneering reference to this holiday moments before his hanging after the Nuremberg Trials. This holiday is celebrated on an alternate date in cities that had walls during Joshua's conquest of Israel. The bribe-money-filled pockets of one character are represented by the triangular pastries eaten on this holiday, in which graggers cause clamor in order to blot out the mention of a villain's name. Celebrated on the 14th of Adar, this holiday involves drinking until one cannot tell the defeat between Mordechai and Haman. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday which celebrates the heroism of Esther.", "Purim", "H"]
["According to tradition, this holiday takes place on the day that Jacob's sight was restored and Moses split the Red Sea. People celebrating this holiday often carry symbolic alams and prepare dishes known as Noah's pudding. Passion plays called tazieh are performed on this holiday, whose celebrants may wear all black, beat their chests, and used a horrifying device called a zanjeer to (*) slash themselves up. The forces of evil are represented by Yazid on this holiday, which takes place on the 10th day of Muharram. This holiday is an optional day of fasting inspired by Yom Kippur for those who view Ali merely as the fourth of the Rashidun, but is much more important for another sect. For 10 points, name this holiday that commemorates the martyrdom of Hussein at the Battle of Karbala in Shi'a Islam.", "Day of Ashura", "H"]
["Traditional Quranic accounts chart the transition of this concept through inciting, self-accusing, and peaceful stages, while it includes a superior \"spark\" aspect in the theology of Meister Eckhart. This word provides the most common translation for the title of an Aristotle work setting three categories of self-nourishment, sense perception, and intellect, which correspond respectively to plants, animals, and man. A work dedicated to Elizabeth of Bohemia claims that the blood carries (*) \"animal spirits\" that act on the body to effect the titular conditions on this entity; that work posits its seat as the pineal gland and is Rene Descartes treatise on the \"Passions of\" this entity. Though more synonymous with the concept of Ba, this entity is often compared to the Egyptian Ka, as well as the Hindu jiva and atman. For 10 points, identify this entity, the individual essence which in many faiths is sent either to heaven or hell after the death of the corporeal body.", "Soul", "H"]
["One man with this name was responsible for a miracle where a rooster and chicken returning to life after being cooked show grieving parents their son still lives. Another person with this name wrote promises to himself in a \"little book\" that included \"Death rather than sin\" and \"My friends shall be Jesus and Mary.\" That man was a student of John Bosco, whose biography of him led to his canonization, making him the youngest non-martyr saint. Another man with this name introduced the (*) rosary as a way to pray in his attempts to stamp out the Albigensian heresy in southern France. His work was continued by the order he founded, whose later members included Thomas Aquinas. For 10 points, name this name shared by men including the founder of the Order of Preachers.", "Saint Dominic", "H"]
["The interpretation of a passage from this text eventually resulted in the creation of the Donmeh ethnic group in Anatolia after the acclamation of a man named Zevi sparked the Sabbatean movement. A tree and spring legendarily appeared to the compiler of this work, allowing him to live in a cave for thirteen years. Aegidius of Viterbo was much-enamored of this text, which is considered incomplete with appendices like the Raze de-Razin and the Idra. Analysis of this text was long concerned with the contrasting worlds of Chaos and (*) Rectification, or Tohu and Tikun, and culminated in the writing of Isaac Luria. It defines five realms emanating from the \"infinite\" embodied by God referred to as \"Ein Sof,\" which manifests in ten intertwined aspects. Attributed by Moses de Leon to Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai and describing the role of the Sefirot, for 10 points, name this book of Jewish mysticism, the foundational text of Kabbalah.", "Zohar", "H"]
["A major scripture venerated by this belief system begins with the section \"The Pairs,\" sometimes translated as \"The Twins,\" which includes the lines \"For hatred does not cease by hatred at any time: hatred ceases by love.\" A later line in that text states \"There is no weakness like anger. There is no suffering like the khandhas. There is no happiness greater than peace.\" The Fourth Council of this sect wrote down its primary text on palm leaves, including many of the verses of the (*) Dhammapada. The highest goal for members of this sect requires overcoming the \"five hinderances\" and \"ten fetters,\" and it centrally studies the Abhidhamma, Sutta, and Vinaya \"baskets\" that compose the Tripitaka, or Pali Canon. This school is often associated with arhats, whereas its main counterpart highlights the role of bodhisattvas. For 10 points, name this variety of Buddhism practiced mostly in Southeast Asia, often contrasted with Mahayana.", "Theravada", "H"]
["Members of this religion believe in God as a total essence of the universe, as opposed to a supreme being above all existence. Adherents of this faith often make pilgrimages to the supposed tomb of Jethro and often congregate in public spaces called mawqaf. Teachings of this religion are divided into three layers, known as zahir, batin and anagoge, with each layer corresponding to different levels of understanding of the teachings. Some (*) 80% of this faith's adherents are known as juhhal, or \"ignorant,\" as they are barred access from holy literature and meetings, while the others are known as al-Uqqal or \"the knowledgeable initiates.\" Represented by a 5-pointed, 5-colored star, this religion views the Fatimid Caliph Al-Hakim as divine and refer to themselves as al-Tahwid. For 10 points, name this Islam-influenced religious group mainly located in Jordan, Syria, and Lebanon.", "Druze", "H"]
["This man was given the town of Ziklag by King Achish while serving in the Philistine army. Late in this man's life he took Abishag the Shunammite for a companion, but was not intimate with her. His son Adoniyah declared himself king, but was passed over for another of this man's sons. While living in the wilderness he was refused hospitality by Nabal, who was struck down by God, after which this man took Nabal's widow Abigail as his wife. This figure had already been married to (*) Michal, who helped him escape from her murderously jealous father. Yet another wife of this man was originally married to Uriah the Hittite until this man schemed to have Uriah killed after he saw her bathing on the roof; that woman was Bathsheba, the mother of Solomon. For 10 points, name this successor to Saul as king of Israel who wrote many Psalms and killed Goliath", "David", "H"]
["This text posits that heirs to their fathers' wealth are no different from slaves as long as they are in their childhood, shortly before comparing Abraham's servant Hagar to a mountain. Its author describes himself as having received the \"right hand of fellowship\" from those men who were \"pillars of the church.\" That author recalls meeting a man called \"Cephas\" in describing the incident at Antioch from Acts, in which Cephas is another name for Peter. According to this book, we must sow seeds which please the Spirit since \"A man (*) reaps what he sows.\" This text argues in its author's large handwriting that Christ lifted the \"schoolmaster\" and \"curse\" that is Moses's law; it therefore attacks circumcision as a misstep for faithful Christian converts. For 10 points, name this Pauline epistl addressed to a church in the mainland of modern-day Turkey that precedes Ephesians and follows Second Corinthians.", "Epistle to the Galatians", "M"]
["In this region, a goddess with blue skin and fiery hair watches over an oval-shaped \"oracle lake\". One building complex here contains heap-like tombs in its Red Palace near the residential White Palace. Devotees from this place use colored sand to make complex circular designs on the ground, and can be divided into Red Hat and Yellow Hat sects. At two years old, this region's holiest man recognized items belonging to his predecessor; that man fled Potala Palace after a 1950 invasion. For 10 points, name this occupied region with its own monastic tradition of Buddhism, whose spiritual leader-in-exile is the 14th Dalai Lama.", "Tibet", "M"]
["This city once had a shrine to the pagan god Hubal, a chief god among 360 idols. One sacred building in this city has brooms dipped in rosewater used to clean its interior twice a year. This city, once home to the Quraysh tribe, contains a sacred spring at the well of Zamzam near a building housing the Black Stone. A lunar calendar counting years after a flight from this city is now at year 1433 after the hejira. The Ka'aba is a boxlike shrine in, for 10 points, what city faced five times a day during prayer, the site of the hajj pilgrimage and holiest city in Islam?", "Mecca", "M"]
["This book describes a locale whose inhabitants wear green silken robes, recline under shade, and can drink from a river of wine or of honey; it calls that location Jannah. Much of this book was initially written on palm branches or scraps of leather and bone. Its seventeenth section tells of the Night Journey, while after its second and longest section, \"The Cow,\" each section is shorter than the previous. Those 114 sections are this book's suras. It often contrasts angels with fiery jinn, and was revealed by the archangel Gabriel in the 600s AD. For 10 points, name this text revealed to the Prophet Muhammad, the holiest book of Islam.", "Quran", "M"]
["This event is celebrated on Belgrave Road in Leicester in Britain for thousands of visitors each year. Some regional variants include a morning bath in sesame oil. On the last day of this holiday, sisters customarily host their brothers at their homes. Before it, believers draw radial chalk designs called rangoli to welcome the goddess of wealth. Celebrated on a new moon in late autumn, it celebrates the slaying of the demon Naraka and the return of Rama. An offering to Lakshmi is performed during, for 10 points, what five day Indian festival, whose use of oil lamps and lanterns leads it to be called the \"festival of lights\"?", "Diwali", "M"]
["In this faith, it's an honor to wave a fan made of yak hair called a chaur in a house of worship; those temples have communal langar kitchens and right-triangular flags bearing a symbol of one circle and three blades. The corpse of this faith's founder turned to flowers. A ceremony using an iron bowl brings believers into its stricter Khalsa order. This faith's adherents venerate Arjun Dev, the compiler of a holy book once called Adi Granth, as the fifth of ten holy men in a series starting with Nanak. For 10 points, name this monotheist faith which reveres gurus, an Indian religion whose males were sometimes assaulted after 9/11 for their beards and turbans.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["On this holiday, adherents recite the Unetanneh Tokef and other piyuttim. On the afternoon of its first day, many adherents cast bread crumbs or pebbles into a body of water in a ritual symbolizing casting off one's sins called tashlikh. This festival is preceded by Elul. It begins a period in which the siddur is replaced by a prayer book called the makhzor, the Ten Days of Awe, and is traditionally celebrated by dipping apples in honey and blowing a ram's horn called the shofar. For 10 points, name this High Holy Day which precedes Yom Kippur, the Jewish New Year.", "Rosh Hashanah", "M"]
["In Eastern Orthodox churches, this practice can't be done until twelve silver objects are held by twenty-four archimandrites for sanctification. The scriptural basis for this practice comes from Acts 8:14 and19:1. It can include a touch or slap on the cheek with the injunction \"Pax tecum\", and the ceremony includes the \"laying of the hands\" and a blessing with chrism. Candidates must have already been baptized before, for 10 points, what Catholic sacrament in which a youth past the age of discretion receives the Holy Spirit and commits to the Church?", "Confirmation (Catholic Church)", "M"]
["In Matthew 13:47, Jesus compares these things to men's souls sorted out by God at the Last Judgment. In Matthew 17:24, Jesus tells Peter that he will find a two-drachma temple tax inside one of them. After John the Baptist's death, two of these things were brought to Jesus before the only miracle documented in all four Gospels. Saint Peter worked with these creatures before becoming an apostle, and in a post-Resurrection miracle, the disciples found 153 of them on the Sea of Galilee. For 10 points, name these creatures whose left-facing 'ichthys' symbol represents Jesus, and which fed the multitudes alongside loaves.", "Fish", "M"]
["The bodies of this man's two sons by Asenath were carried along with his to be buried in Shechem. Late in life, he accused a younger brother of stealing a silver cup from his treasury. This man was put in jail with a cupbearer and baker for allegedly sleeping with the wife of Potiphar. He later became a grand vizier after correctly predicting a seven-year famine in Egypt by interpreting Pharaoh's dreams. For 10 points, name this man sold into slavery by his eleven brothers, who for being the favorite son of the Hebrew patriarch Jacob was given a coat of many colors.", "Joseph", "M"]
["This faith classifies the souls of unliberated beings by the number of senses those beings have. Two of its sects disagree on whether Mallinath was a woman; those who believe that have white-clad monks while disbelievers' monks are \"sky-clad\" and thereby naked. This religion believes people get smaller and live shorter lives as the cycle of time goes on. Its believers make five great vows, venerate their tirthankar founder Mahavira, and respect the souls of animals and plants. For 10 points, name this Indian religion whose adherents filter water to avoid drinking insects in keeping with ahimsa, or total non-violence.", "Jainism", "M"]
["This man names a prose text describing Nebro and Saklas, two rebel angels who created humanity; that text describes Adamas emerging from a luminous cloud and was written in Coptic. During a foot-washing, this man is described as carrying a purse full of money. In one account, he died when his intestines burst on Hakeldama, the Field of Blood. This namesake of a Gnostic gospel was buried in a potter's field after hanging himself in despair. He received thirty pieces of silver for entering the Garden of Gethsemane and kissing another man to mark him for arrest. For 10 points, identify this Apostle who betrayed Jesus to the Romans.", "Judas Iscariot", "H"]
["In the Orthodox Church, at the feast commemorating this event, the blessing of the first fruits occurs. Gregory of Nyssa's concept of energia being the manifestation of God influenced Gregory Palamas, while defending hesychasm, to argue that repetition of the Jesus Prayer allows one to see the same light as select apostles did at this event. Thomas Aquinas argued that this event was the \"greatest miracle\" because it allowed Jesus to display the glory of his soul in spite of his body. It occurs in the Synoptic Gospels and follows the Confession of Peter. The prophets Elijah and Moses appear before Peter, James the Greater, and John who are also told by a cloud that \"This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am pleased; Listen to him!\" FTP, name this event that occurred at Mount Tabor where Jesus' face \"shone like a sun, and his clothes became as white as light.\"", "Buhe", "H"]
["Dr. Pierre Dozous attempted to use one of these objects to test whether Bernadette Soubirous' visions were miraculous. These objects are used to bless Catholics' throats on the Feast of Saint Blaise. In Eastern Orthodoxy, three of them are in a trikirion, while in Judaism, a yahrzeit one of these is used to commemorate the dead. These objects provide the name for the February 2nd Feast of the Presentation of the Lord, and four of them symbolize the four weeks of Advent in an Advent wreath. One inscribed with an alpha and omega is used during the Easter Vigil and called the \"Paschal\" one. Jewish law mandates that two of them, representing shamor and zakhor, be used eighteen minutes before sunset on Friday to usher in Shabbat; on a different holiday, one of them is called the shamash, or \"helper.\" FTP, name these objects, eight of which represent the eight days of Hannukah.", "Candle", "H"]
["Vasubandhu's explication of this doctrine as well as the Lankanavatara are the some primary sources for the systematization of this doctrine. Later non-Indian Buddhist traditions such as the Huayan School also developed this doctrine through works such as Fa-Zhang's essay \"On the Golden Lion.\" Developed theoretically during the Yogacara school, this doctrine's analysis of sva-bhava or \"own-being\" is explicitly rejected by Nagarjuna. One part of this doctrine relates to the \"other-dependent\" or \"incomplete-awakening\" of the bodhisattvas and relates to the \"shared-reward\" or \"sambhoga\" form of this doctrine, which allows them to be understood as a bridge in this doctrine. The first or \"nirmana\" form of this doctrine refers to the historical manifestation of the Buddha. FTP, name this doctrine which holds that the Buddha-nature can be understood has having three forms or bodies.", "Trikaya", "H"]
["The \"need\" variety of this practice traces its origins to a blind man, while a man must stand guard during the \"fear\" variety of this practice. The timing for this practice partly depends on how an upright stick casts a shadow. The form of this practice named for droughts cannot be done with a dhimmi present, and special forms of it are done during eclipses. This practice is sometimes assisted by the use of a sutrah or screen. Errors in performing this practice are often rectified with an extra sujud. It involves postures called ruku and qiyam, and niyyah is a requirement before this act, which has anywhere from two to five ra'kats. Another act that must be performed before this ritual is Ghusl and wudu. Some forms of this practice are begun by the adhan, and this practice is done facing the qiblah. FTP, identify this five-times daily activity that consists of a series of standing, bowing and kneeling, a pillar of Islam.", "Salah", "H"]
["The historical version of this figure reportedly took the throne from his older brother Ajaka and routed an army sent against him. But, legend says he later hanged himself on an ayan tree after his palace was destroyed, and his more peaceful older brother reassumed power. He's worshipped by followers who hold a wooden staff showing a kneeling woman. Alternately known as Jakuta, he's usually depicted with a double-axe above his head. Historically, he moved the capital to Oyo, and became the third Alafin of the Oyo kingdom. He provides the foundation for a Baptist church in Trinidad, and in Santeria, this red-and-white deity is often conflated with Saint Barbara, the patron of explosives. FTP, name this orisha who strikes down liars with his primary weapon, a lightning bolt.", "Shango", "H"]
["The leader of this action is invited to the plain of Ono to meet with his enemies, who include the corrupt prophet Shemaiah and the prophetess Noadiah. After this action is completed, its leader places Hanani in charge. It's finished on the twenty-fifth of Elul and was heavily opposed by Sanballat and Tobiah the Ammonite. It's set in motion after the cupbearer to a king inspects structures named for a \"Valley\" and \"Dung\" and declares them to be \"broken down.\" The leader of this action requests a letter to Asaph, the keeper of King Artaxerxes' forest, to obtain timber. The book immediately before the one with this action describes the rebuilding of the temple, led by Ezra. FTP, name this action finished in Nehemiah 6, which involved repairing a structure outside a holy city.", "Song of Ascents", "H"]
["The title character in this book accuses his wife, Anna, of stealing a goat that she had been given in exchange for cloth. A woman in Ecbatana contemplates hanging herself, but instead prays to God for death. Raguel digs a grave for his new son-in-law, expecting him to die. The title character, an exile in Ninevah, is diligent in burying Israelites killed by Sennacherib and later he sends his son on a trip to retrieve money he left with Gabael in Media accompanied by an angel disguised as Azarias. By burning parts of a fish, his son drives off the demon that killed Sarah's previous seven husbands, Asmodeus. FTP, name this apocryphal book of the Bible where the main character catches a giant fish and uses its gallbladder to cure his father's blindness.", "Book of Tobit", "H"]
["A revisionist explanation for the absence of this text is the Farrer-Goulder hypothesis. Divisions of it include the \"stratification\" proposed by John Kloppenborg and the identification of late \"Hellenistic\" elements by Siegfried Schultz. A possible scribal error in this text regarding the growth of lilies may be evidence that it was, at least once, written in Greek. This text is suggested as the source of such passages as the one that calls woe unto the towns of Chorazin and Bethsaida, and it may have been a \"sayings text\" used by early Jewish Christians. Coined in name by the German scholar Johannes Weiss, it is proposed as the common origin for material found in Matthew and Luke but not in Mark. FTP, name this hypothesized gospel which takes its single-letter name from the German word for \"source.\"", "Q source", "H"]
["In Hindu astrology, it's very important to keep this close to your penis or vagina in order to appease the \"malefic moon.\" A Jewish demon called the Broxa bird steals this substance during the night. During the Agnistoma, it's customary to offer two golden bowls of this, to represent the divine will of life. According to the Golden Legend, Saint Cuthbert chopped off his own leg after yelling at his parents, then reattached it to his body by smearing this on it. In 1st Corinthians, Paul writes that this is more important than solid food, since his addressees are \"of the flesh.\" After Horus is blinded by Set, this restores his sight after it's obtained from the sycamore tree. Judaic dietary law cites Exodus 23:19 as evidence that meats should not be consumed with this. FTP, identify this substance which flows along with honey in the Land of Israel.", "Milk", "H"]
["This movement was a primary target of the philosophical work The Book of Beliefs and Opinions. In the 1990s, Meir Rekhavi and Nehemia Gordon led a revival of this movement. Its namesake language is a Turkic language spoken in Crimea, where a population of this movement's followers was once led by Avraham Firkovich. Controversy exists over whether the refiner of the Tiberian system of writing, Aaron ben Asher, was a member of this movement. An early leader of this movement was Anan ben David, although many theologians consider Ananism to be separate from it. Members of this movement do not believe in lighting candles before Shabbat, and they deny connections to the Sadducees, even though both groups reject the Oral Torah. FTP, name this Jewish movement which rejects rabbinical interpretation of scripture.", "Karaite", "H"]
["These people may disbelieve that their wife has been raped if there are fewer than two witnesses. A ceremony involving one of these people places a male child on a silver tray laden with women's jewelry. They name a ceremony also called a duchening only performed in joyous situations. They are the recipients of the wave and heave offerings, and they were once presented with the forelegs, cheeks, and maw of a slaughtered animal. Another ritual sees these people paid five silver coins in order to redeem a child. Those rituals are part of the 24 gifts of these people, who wore an embroidered tunic called a ketonet. These people form a V-shape with their hands when giving the birkat or blessing, and they read the first aliyah on Shabbat. Famous examples of them included Eleazar, Ahimelech, and Zadok. They're descended from Moses' brother Aaron. FTP, name these Jewish priests.", "Kohen", "H"]
["One of the sons of Rechab cried out in an attempt to stop this man from being clubbed to death while praying. In this man's \"secret gospel,\" he's able to understand what a resurrected Jesus is saying, but Peter is not. St. Hegesippus relates that he was martyred by being thrown from a Temple tower, but Flavius Josephus claims he was stoned to death. His namesake apocryphal gospel describes the martyrdom of Zachariah and gives an account of Mary's birth. In the Orthodox tradition, Saint Basil the Great shortened this man's namesake liturgy, the earliest complete form of the Divine Liturgy. This man was the first bishop of Jerusalem, and Paul grouped him with Peter and John as one of the three pillars of the Church. Oded Golan claimed to have found an ossuary containing his bones in 2004. FTP, name this son of Joseph, often called the brother of Jesus, and often called \"the Just.\"", "James, brother of Jesus", "H"]
["One section in this work claims that the righteous prefer food that is neither sweet nor sour, neither cold nor hot, but the indifferent prefer food that is a day old and too spicy. Another section claims that anger breeds amnesia and must be avoided at all costs. The speaker repeatedly stresses the fickleness of material life and lectures his listener in the virtues of following his duties without hesitation. Large portions are devoted to the discussion and analysis of the nature and composition of the soul, or the atma, proclaiming that it cannot be destroyed by fire, wind, or water. The speaker ends by declaring that anyone in the future who reads this text either to himself or to a group will attain salvation, or moksha. Delivered during the heat of the battle, FTP, name this religious text where Krishna counsels the Pandava prince Arjuna on matters of life, a central text of Hinduism.", "Bhagavad Gita", "H"]
["According to the Gospel of Mark, Jesus cursed a fig tree after leaving this place, which has a name meaning \"house of dates.\" One biblical incident took place at the residence of Simon the Leper in this town, when some disciples became angry that a woman anointed the head of Jesus with expensive perfume instead of using the money to feed the poor. Jesus' entry into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday begins in this village. One resident of this place becomes frustrated when she is left to do all the housework, while her sister sits at the feet of Jesus. In another story, Jesus intentionally delays going to this village for two days despite a desperate plea for his healing. This village was located on the Mount of Olives, and was home to the Mary, Martha, and their brother who was brought back from the dead by Jesus. FTP, name this Biblical home of Lazarus.", "Bethany (biblical village)", "E"]
["Anglican and Islamic versions of this action each include 100 steps. This action involves meditation on a chaplet, which is a set of luminous, glorious, joyful, or sorrowful mysteries. It ends with the Salve Regina (sal-VAY reh-JEEN-uh) prayer, which follows a multiple of five decades as depicted by the namesake instrument. For 10 points, name this practice in which Our Fathers and Hail Marys are prayed and counted along a string of beads.", "Methods of praying the rosary", "E"]
["After initiation into the Khalsa (KAHL-sah) in this religion, adherents must wear a wooden comb, known as the \"kanga\"(KAHN-gah), and a steel bracelet, known as the \"kara\" (KAH-rah), which are two of the five K's. Arjun (AR-joon) Dev compiled this religion's holy text, the Adi Granth, which contains many of the sayings of the first leader, or guru, of this religion. For 10 points, identify this religion founded by Nanak, whose adherents are mostly found in the Punjab region.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["Matthew, Chapter 28 notes that Jesus commanded his followers to \"go therefore and make disciples of all nations\" by performing this action. Seventh-day Adventists reserve this practice for adults, though in most Christian denominations it is primarily for infants. For 10 points, identify this Christian initiation sacrament in which participants are sprinkled with or immersed in water.", "Baptism", "E"]
["In the Gospel of James, this Biblical figure is described as the child of Anna and Joachim. At the First Council of Ephesus, this figure was given the epithet Theotokos, or \"God-Bearer.\" Martin Luther described this person as \"the highest woman.\" This woman is held to be free from original sin under the doctrine of Immaculate Conception. For 10 points, name this mother of Jesus of Nazareth.", "Mary, mother of Jesus", "E"]
["This country's northwest is home to the Islamic Uighur (WEE-gur) people. The leader of another religion from this country described the \"Five Great Relationships\" and listed virtues like \"reciprocity\" and \"culture\" in one of the \"Four Books.\" Adherents of a third religion from this country follow the practice of \"no action,\" or wu wei. For 10 points, identify this country home to Confucianism and Daoism.", "China", "E"]
["Every chapter after the first chapter of this work is arranged from longest to shortest and all but one begins with the word \"bismallah\" (biss-MAH-lah). This work's second chapter is known as the \"Cow\" sura and the first revelation in this text was transmitted when Muhammad was near the Cave of Hira (HEE-rah). For 10 points, identify this text that is taken to be the word of Allah by Muslims.", "Quran", "E"]
["Cyrus the Great allowed this structure to be built to replace a similar building destroyed during Nebuchadnezzar II's reign. Judas Maccabaeus cleansed and rededicated this structure in events celebrated during Hanukkah. This building served as the Sanhedrin's meeting place and was mostly destroyed in 70 AD. For 10 points, the West, or Wailing, Wall is the only remaining part of the latter of what Jewish holy site?", "Second Temple", "E"]
["This person was described as a \"beloved physician\" by a \"coworker,\" and this man's feast day is October 18. He dedicated two books to Theophilus (thee-AH-fill-uss), including one that begins with the Ascension and describes the missionary journeys of that \"coworker,\" Paul. For 10 points, name this author of Acts of the Apostles and the third Gospel of the New Testament.", "Luke the Evangelist", "E"]
["After initiation into the Khalsa (KAHL-sah) in this religion, adherents must wear a wooden comb, known as the \"kanga\"(KAHN-gah), and a steel bracelet, known as the \"kara\" (KAH-rah), which are two of the five K's. Arjun (AR-joon) Dev compiled this religion's holy text, the Adi Granth, which contains many of the sayings of the first leader, or guru, of this religion. For 10 points, identify this religion founded by Nanak, whose adherents are mostly found in the Punjab region.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["One story in this book involves a man who marries a daughter of Jethro; that man's mother is Jochebed (JOE-keh-bed) and his sister is Miriam. This book begins with the death of Joseph and sees a ruler declare that all newborn Jewish babies must be drowned in the Nile. In this book, Aaron and Moses ask the pharaoh to \"let my people go.\" For 10 points, the Jews' flight from Egypt is detailed in what second book of the Bible?", "Book of Exodus", "M"]
["This religion was practiced by members of the Way of the Five Pecks of Rice. Compassion, frugality, and humility are this religion's Three Treasures. One of this religion's important texts was written by Zhuangzi. Concepts in this religion include perception without prejudice, or pu, and power, or de. Its deities include the creator god Pangu and the heaven-ruling Jade Emperor. It stresses the principle of \"doing without doing\" called Wu Wei. For 10 points, name this Chinese religion of \"the way,\" the central text of which was written by Laozi.", "Taoism", "M"]
["Followers of this holy man built the Stele of Chang-an in 781 CE. Alopen established worship of this man during the Tang Dynasty. In Japan, artworks showing revered figures in this man's namesake religion were known as fumi-e, and people reluctant to step on them were persecuted as Kirishitan. The Shimabara Rebellion was a revolt of Japanese people who worshiped this man, whose supposed younger brother led the Taiping Rebellion. For 10 points, name this man whose teachings were spread to India and China by Jesuit missionary Francis Xavier.", "Jesus", "M"]
["The speaker of this book is given a \"reed like unto a rod\" and is told to measure the temple of God and the worshippers inside. Some events of this book are set off by the \"Lion of Judah.\" It describes the star Wormwood, which poisons the waters it falls on. Martyrs cry for the \"word of God\" in this book during the opening of the fifth seal, which is followed by seven trumpets blown by seven angels. Its authorship is attributed to John of Patmos. For 10 points, name this last book of the Bible that describes the end of the world.", "Book of Revelation", "M"]
["On this day alone, the Kohen Gadol wore white linen robes while pronouncing the Tetragrammaton. Its worship service ends with the Ne'ila and involves reading the Book of Jonah. This day, which features five prayers beginning with the Kol Nidre, takes place on the Tenth of Tishrei, ending the High Holy Days. It occurs five days before Sukkot and nine days after Rosh Hashanah. For 10 points, worshipers seek God's forgiveness while abstaining and fasting on what Jewish Day of Atonement?", "Yom Kippur", "M"]
["This book includes a dream in which an enormous idol made of four metals, with feet of mixed iron and clay, is destroyed. Figures in this book include the Kings of the North and South and Darius the Mede, a ruler whose coming is foretold by a disembodied hand. This book includes four apocalyptic revelations and an account of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who are thrown into a furnace. For 10 points, name this Old Testament book whose namesake survives being thrown into a lion's den.", "Book of Daniel", "M"]
["Seven of the guests of this ceremony recite blessings known as the Sheva Brachot. The first blessing recited during this ceremony is said over wine, which is then tasted by the participants. The most important action in this ceremony takes place under a canopy, or Chuppah, and signifies the building of a new home. The Krenzel and Mizinke are two dances performed in celebration of this event, which also features the breaking of a glass under a man's foot. For 10 points, name this ceremony that marks the forming of a new family within a particular religion.", "Jewish wedding", "M"]
["On one journey, this figure traveled with Silas after refusing to bring John Mark along. He cured Publius's father of dysentery after being shipwrecked on Malta, where he was bitten by a snake but remained unharmed, leading him to be confused for a god. He preached in both Antioch and Jerusalem with Barnabas. This man converted after his sight was restored by Ananias, which was necessary due to a vision he saw on the road to Damascus. For 10 points, name this Apostle, a native of Tarsus, who wrote one epistle to the Romans and two to the Corinthians.", "Paul the Apostle", "M"]
["This religion's founder penned the \"Large\" and \"Small\" Catechisms and the Smalcald articles, all of which are part of the Book of Concord. This faith believes in sacramental union instead of transubstantiation. One of its early leaders, Philip Melanchthon, largely penned its twenty-eight-article Augsburg Confession. The Missouri and Wisconsin synods are divisions of this religion, which is the state church of Norway and Denmark. For 10 points, name this branch of Protestantism based on the teachings of a namesake German Monk who authored the 95 Theses.", "Lutheranism", "M"]
["In one story, this man reaches his hand into his own chest and pulls it back out, after which it looks like snow. In another story, he causes total darkness to cover a land for three days. He built a tabernacle that seemed to be covered with fire during the day. He protected seven shepherdesses at a well and was adopted by Hobab, whose daughter Zipporah he married. This man, who fled to Midian after murdering a man, saw God in the form of a burning bush and set the plagues upon Egypt. For 10 points, name this brother of Aaron who parted the Red Sea.", "Moses", "M"]
["This man had one vision of four beasts coming out of the sea, while another vision concerned a battle between a two-horned ram and a he-goat. This man was summoned to interpret the message \"Mene, Mene, Tekel, Ufarsin,\" which was written on a wall predicting Belshazzar's downfall. Three of this man's friends were sent into a blazing fiery furnace because of their stand to exclusively serve their God alone.  He gained favor with King Nebuchadnezzar when he correctly interpreted one of his dreams. For 10 points, name this prophet who refused to offer prayer to King Darius and was thrown into a lions' den.", "Daniel", "M"]
["This substance is manipulated in bowls while monks recite blessings in the yay zet cha, a Burmese Buddhist ritual. This substance is cupped by the hands in the Hindu ritual known as the Tarpana, and is also used on a funeral pyre to keep the soul from escaping as a ghost. In the Tayammum this substance is notably missing from the ritual as opposed to ghusl and wudu in Islam, where this substance is used. The tevilah in Judaism requires a full-body immersion in this substance as opposed to the more common mikveh. For 10 points, name this liquid often used in forms of religious ablution and Baptism.", "Water", "M"]
["Aaron and Hur watched a battle led by this man from a distant hill against the Amelekites at Rephidim. This figure also led the destruction of a city, and then moved to a small neighboring city to the west named Ai, and was defeated with a loss of 36 men. At Gibeon, this man asked God to cause the sun and moon to stand still, so that he could finish the battle in daylight. This man and Caleb were the only two spies promised entry into the Promised Land because of a favorable report to Moses. The Jordan River parted for this man, and soon after this man led the destruction of Jericho. FTP, name this biblical figure who led the Israelite tribes in the conquest of Canaan.", "Joshua", "M"]
["Brinsley Trench's book The Sky People claims that descriptions of this location apply better to canals on Mars than to any place on Earth. Joseph Smith ordered the construction of the city of Adam-Ondi-Ahman on the site he believed to be this location in Jackson County, Missouri, after finding the ruins of an altar there. A river that flowed through it split into the four rivers Hidekel, Phrath, Gihon and Pishon. This location contained the Tree of Life and the Tree of Knowledge, and eating from the latter got some residents evicted. For 10 points, name this Biblical location where Adam and Eve lived.", "Garden of Eden", "M"]
["During the concluding service on this day, known as the Ne'ilah,  the ark is kept open and participants must stand throughout the service. The holiday is instituted at Leviticus 23:26 and it begins with a service commonly known as Kol Nidre, named for the prayer that begins the service. It is the end of the time of year known as the \"Days of Awe,\" and it is celebrated on the tenth day of Tishrei. On this day, participants are required to abstain from eating, drinking, washing, and sex. For ten points, name this Jewish Day of Atonement.", "Yom Kippur", "M"]
["According to Luke 2:24, Mary and Joseph engaged in this practice after Jesus was circumcised and was brought to Jerusalem for presentation to god. Udhiyah are subjected to this practice during Eid al-Adha by Muslims who can afford to do so. The city of Hialeah, Florida, was forced by a 1993 Supreme Court decision to remove its prohibition on this ritual as practiced by members of the Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, who argued that they engage in this practice to feed their Orishas and carry it out humanely. FTP what is this ritual still practiced by some adherents of Santeria, who eat the remains created by this action?", "Animal sacrifice", "M"]
["The teachings of this sect have been likened to \"the finger pointing at the moon,\" where \"truth and words are unrelated.\" It was brought to America by D.T. Suzuki who described kensho as \"looking into one's nature or the opening of satori.\"  The Blue Cliff Record and The Gateless Gate are central works used in Renzai school practice, which are collections of Buddhist koans. Derived from the Sanskrit word dhyana, for ten points, identify this sect of Buddhism which emphasizes meditation.", "Zen", "M"]
["One festival of this religion lasts 8-10 days and involves a daily meditation called Pratikramana. This religion also celebrates the day of enlightenment for Gautam Swami and his master, a sage named Vardhamana who taught about five vows that include asteya and aparigraha. This religion's most important holidays are Deva Diwali and Paryushana. It is divided into the Digambara and Svetambara sects. In prior times, this religion followed the Purvas, texts now lost whose teachings were expounded by some of the 24 tirthankaras, whose ranks include Mahavira. For 10 points, name this religion that practices ahimsa, or non-violence.", "Jainism", "M"]
["A book titled for the \"Genius of [this concept] argues that Racine was a greater writer than Voltaire because of the former's religious beliefs, and was written by Francois Chateaubriand. The idea that \"the good\" is personified by God was propounded by Ludwig Feuerbach [FOI-er-bahkh] in a work titled The Essence of [this concept]. C.S. Lewis put forward his namesake \"trilemma,\" arguing a seminal figure was either a \"lunatic, liar, or lord\" titled \"Mere\" [this concept], a type of rational approach to this faith known as \"apologetics.\" FTP what is this monotheistic faith with many divisions, including Lutheran and Catholic?", "Christianity", "M"]
["In the Quran, Allah sends one of these animals to show Cain how to bury Abel's dead body. This animal was cursed for being the only animal to have sex while on Noah's Ark, and this animal accused Noah of plotting to have sex with his female counterpart in another story from the Talmud. In 1st Kings, these animals supply Elijah with bread and meat while he is in hiding in the wilderness. Unlike the dove, one of these animals was sent out for reconnaissance by Noah after the flood but did not return. For 10 points, name these birds, who were subsequently cursed with blackness.", "Ravens", "M"]
["In the Quran, Allah sends one of these animals to show Cain how to bury Abel's dead body. This animal was cursed for being the only animal to have sex while on Noah's Ark, and this animal accused Noah of plotting to have sex with his female counterpart in another story from the Talmud. In 1st Kings, these animals supply Elijah with bread and meat while he is in hiding in the wilderness. Unlike the dove, one of these animals was sent out for reconnaissance by Noah after the flood but did not return. For 10 points, name these birds, who were subsequently cursed with blackness.", "Ravens", "M"]
["One of these figures uses a foot-and-a-half long short sword to kill Eglon. Another of these figures orders the killing of fugitives who mispronounce the word shibboleth. That figure kills his only daughter after promising to sacrifice the first thing that greets him on his return from defeating the Ammonites. Another of these figures leads an army of 300 men after requesting two miracles involving a fleece. Still another slew 300 Philistines with the jawbone of an ass before being betrayed by Delilah. For 10 points, name these Biblical figures, whose ranks include Jephthah, Gideon, and Samson, the namesake of a book in the Old Testament.", "Book of Judges", "M"]
["One of these figures uses a foot-and-a-half long short sword to kill Eglon. Another of these figures orders the killing of fugitives who mispronounce the word shibboleth. That figure kills his only daughter after promising to sacrifice the first thing that greets him on his return from defeating the Ammonites. Another of these figures leads an army of 300 men after requesting two miracles involving a fleece. Still another slew 300 Philistines with the jawbone of an ass before being betrayed by Delilah. For 10 points, name these Biblical figures, whose ranks include Jephthah, Gideon, and Samson, the namesake of a book in the Old Testament.", "Book of Judges", "M"]
["Four brothers who held up the sky from cardinal points were called Bacab in this mythical system. Those brothers were the offspring of a creator deity of this mythos, sometimes associated with Hunab Ku, named Itzamna. This system's central text details the defeat of Vucub-Came, aka Seven Death, in the traditional ballgame by Hunahpu and Xbalanque (sh-ba-lan-kay). The Hero Twins are featured in what myth system, FTP, the central text of which is the Popul Vuh and which was centered in a Yucatan culture?", "Maya mythology", "M"]
["This figure watched a golden bowl float upstream after being given milk-rice by Sujata. A tooth retrieved from his funeral pyre by an arhat named Khema is now kept at the Temple of the Tooth in Kandy. His cousin Devadatta tried to kill him by setting loose a drunke elephant before unsuccessfully trying to create a schism in the Sangha, the community of this man's followers. This man gave a discourse called Setting in Motion the Wheel of Dharma expounding the Four Noble Truths after attaining Nirvana under the Bodhi tree. For 10 points, name this founder of a namesake Indian religion, a spiritual teacher born Siddhartha Gautama.", "Gautama Buddha", "H"]
["The Berleburg version of this text was written by Pietists so that the \"one divine meaning\" of it would be revealed. Sirach and Tobit are works included within the Septuagint, which excludes many other Greek portions of this text. A notable version of this text was translated by John Wycliffe. One version of this text establishes the Apocrypha as deuterocanonical, a distinction Martin Luther draws upon in creating his version of this scripture. Jerome translated this text into Latin to create a version called the Vulgate. For 10 points, name this work of scripture, which comes in American Standard and King James versions and is broken into Old and New Testaments.", "Bible", "H"]
["James Strang, founder of the Strangite sect of this religion, was king of Beaver Island until his assassination. Other sects of this faith include Rigdonites and Bickertonites. At one point, members of this faith settled in Independence, Missouri, where the Church of Christ Temple Lot is based. This faith began when its first leader had the \"grove experience\" and after that man's murder, its followers left Nauvoo, Illinois to established the State of Deseret under the leadership of Brigham Young. This faith's holy book was translated from golden plates revealed by the angel Moroni. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Joseph Smith, of which Mitt Romney is an adherent.", "Mormons", "H"]
["The flames surrounding the Nataraja, or the god Shiva dancing, represent this event, which occurs every four yugas. Both the eighteenth chapter of the Qur'an and the Book of Ezekiel indicate that a conflict between Gog and Magog will occur during this event. The beasts Zizz, Behemoth, and Leviathan will be served as entrees at a large banquet after they are slain by God at this time. A sun that rises in the west, three huge earthquakes, and a \"false Messiah\" or Antichrist will accompany this event brought about when the angel Gabriel blows a trumpet to resurrect the dead. For 10 points, name this final event in religious cosmologies, which some believe will occur this December.", "End of the world", "H"]
["First Peter: 22-23 attests that a person who has become this exhibits \"unfeigned love of the brethren\" and is \"incorruptible,\" but its prevalence across Christian denominations can better be accounted for by Jesus' claim in John 3:3 that a person must become this before seeing the kingdom of God. John Wesley accepted this for infants, but adults must experience a radical \"change of heart\" for this mode of regeneration to occur. The Eastern Orthodox, Catholic, and Lutheran Churches take this requirement to be fulfilled by the rite of baptism. For 10 points, name this kind of revival, a mechanism of Christian salvation best known among American Evangelical Christians.", "Born again", "H"]
["Unlike most Jewish holidays, business transactions may continue during this festive event, which is often preceded by a day of fasting. During this holiday, it is customary to \"blot out the name of\" the son of Amalek each of the 54 times his name appears during the reading of the Megillah. This holiday commemorates events that occurred in Shushan, including God's foiling of the plot of the vizier to King Ahaseurus to kill every Jew in the Persian Empire. Luckily for the Jews, Haman was stopped by Mordecai. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday during which it is customary to be charitable, give candy to friends, and read from the Book of Esther.", "Purim", "H"]
["Yogacara posits \"storehouse consciousness,\" consisting of seeds that ripen into a person's experience, to explain this concept. In Jainism, both vasudevas and prativasudevas acquire one variety of this while baladevas acquire comparatively less. Some traditions hold that different colors of this concept taint a person's soul. Bhakti, or devotion, and knowledge are alternative paths to this concept in the Bhagavad Gita, while arhats and bodhisattvas, like buddhas, are not affected by this. For 10 points, name this concept prevalent in Hinduism and Buddhism, the idea that actions committed in previous lifetimes influence one's prospects for rebirth.", "Karma", "H"]
["The Quran'ic account of this figure remarks that upon seeing him women at a banquet he attended cut themselves with the knives they were holding because he was so beautiful. With Asenath, this man had two children, Manasseh and Ephraim. This figure had a dream in which eleven stars, the sun, and the moon bowed before him. This man's brother Reuben advocated throwing him down a well, but this grandson of Isaac was eventually taken to Egypt where his gift of prophecy earned him a station second only to the pharaoh. For 10 points, name this son of Rachel and Jacob who owned a coat of many colors.", "Joseph", "H"]
["It's not France, but Frederic de La Harpe served on the Directory of this country after France established a republic here with a constitution written by Peter Ochs. Its neutrality in one war was questioned in the Grimm- Hoffmann Affair and Henri Guisan created a defense system for this nation involving mountain fortresses. Francis I defeated mercenaries from here at the Battle of Marignano, while a theologian from this country participated in the Kappel Wars and debated with Martin Luther at Marburg. That man's doctrine was unified by Heinrich Bullinger and John Calvin, another thinker from here. For 10 points, name this country home to the cantons of Zurich and Geneva.", "Switzerland", "H"]
["Dropping a stone into still water demonstrates how these concepts become sensible after they arise from an initial emptiness and later return to that emptiness. The unity and ultimate nature of these concepts are espoused in a certain martial arts style that involves the interrelations of attack and defense. Shown as either broken or solid lines in the trigrams and hexagrams of the I Ching, these concepts can also stand for passivity and aggression, male and female, and other dualities manifested through these cosmic principles. For 10 points, name these dual concepts prevalent in Chinese religion, often sybmolized with a circle broken into tear drops, one white and the other black.", "Yin and yang", "H"]
["This religious group practices a controversial mut'a or temporary marriage. This denomination emphasizes taqiyya, or concealing one's faith for purposes of self-protection. The largest branch of this sect professes belief in twelve divinely ordained leaders or sinless and infallible imams. Members of this denomination claim that only recordings of members of Mohammad's family are authoritative, leading them to reject the hadith derived from people like Omar ibn al-Khattab and Abu Bakr. This denomination rose out of a schism in which its members favored Ali. For 10 points, name this branch of Islam common in Iran and opposed to the Sunni branch.", "Shia Islam", "H"]
["In \"The Cave,\" the eighteenth chapter of the Qur'an, this man witnesses the wrecking of a boat and the murder of a child at the hands of a man named Khidr, the Green Man. God revealed the statement \"I am that I am\" to this prophet, who was forced to flee from his homeland upon murdering one of the natives, only to return at the behest of a burning bush. This husband of Miriam was able to change his staff into a snake and turned the Nile into blood, demanding, \"Let my people go.\" For 10 points, name this brother of Aaron who led the Jews out of Egypt and received the Ten Commandments on Mount Sinai.", "Moses", "H"]
["Sankhya thought typically uses the term purusha to characterize this entity. The Qur'an discusses Nafs, the evil kind of this. The term translated as this in Kaballah and the Old Testament is Nephesh. Ancient Chinese writers discuss Hun, a rational principle, which is also the subject of ancestor worship. Medieval Christians called this Anima because it functions as a principle of motion or life. In the Upanishads, this metaphysical concept is alternatively called Jiva or Atman, which stands in relation to Brahman, the \"world\" variety of this. For 10 points, name this imperishable part of a person that might be taken up to Heaven or reincarnated into a cucumber, contrasted with the mind and body.", "Soul", "H"]
["Tertullian asked what Athens has to do with this city in his critique of Classical learning. The Arch of Titus was built in commemoration of this city's capture in 70 AD, and Paul's trial before the Sanhedrin also occurred in this city. An eighth century BCE tunnel built to carry water into this city in the event of an Assyrian siege can still be seen today. The miraj or ascension of Muhammad to heaven occurred in this city above the Well of Souls. This city houses the Istanbuli and Rambam Synagogues as well as the Church of the Holy Sepulchre and the Temple Mount. In this city, the Foundation Stone lies inside the Dome of the Rock. For 10 points, name this city in the West Bank, Israel's current capital.", "Jerusalem", "H"]
["This Gospel contains the most expansive account of the feeding of the five thousand. It includes a discussion at the Temple during the Feast Booths between Jesus and Nicodemus following a wedding in Cana. This Gospel also relates the healing of a paralytic at a Bethesda pool and the raising of Lazarus, which are described as two of the seven signs. Unlike the other three Gospels, this gospel contains no accounts of exorcism, the Transfiguration, the temptation in the desert, or Sermon on the Mount. For 10 points, name this non-Synoptic Gospel which begins instead with, \"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,\" the last of the four Gospels.", "Gospel of John", "H"]
["The sections of this text occur in chronological order, except for the \"Words of\" its namesake and the section named after Ether, which describes the exploits of a people descended from Jared after the confusion of tongues at the Tower of Babel. Its central narrative begins at the time of Jeremiah with a patriarch called Lehi, whose family eventually split into the Nephites and Lamanites, and in this scripture a later generation of Nephites was visited by the resurrected Jesus long after their ancestors reached the Americas. For 10 points, name this religious scripture preserved in a New York hillside on golden plates until it was unearthed by Joseph Smith with the help of an angel named Moroni.", "Book of Mormon", "H"]
["Of the 75 classes of things Vasubandhu denotes in his Treasury of Metaphysics, two of the unconditioned classes refer to this state, which is often portrayed by a reclining image of the man who first taught how it might be obtained. This state refers to the \"blowing out\" of the fires of hatred, delusion, and greed, and is distinguished from moksa. This goal is at the end of a regimen of ethical action, meditation, and wisdom called the Eightfold Path, which is also known as the Fourth Noble Truths. After attaining this soteriological goal, like Siddhartha Gautama did under the Bodhi tree, a person will then attain its pari- or complete variety at the moment of death upon which he or she will undergo no future rebirths. For 10 points, name this goal of Buddhism.", "Nirvana", "H"]
["This man calls down blindness upon Elymas the magician, causing Sergius Paulus to follow his religion. He claims the people surrounding the Areopagus are the offspring of an \"unknown god\" in an attempt to convert them with the help of his follower Barnabus. This man wrote that people should preach \"the unsearchable riches of Christ\" and compares the Church to the Body of Christ in another work. In his most famous work, he writes that a person may be \"justified by faith alone.\" This man of Jewish ancestry from Tarsus was converted on the road to Damascus. For 10 points, name this early Christian Apostle who wrote \"love is patient\" in his First Letter to the Corinthians.", "Paul the Apostle", "H"]
["This figure's bones were transported to the town of Bari in the 11th century. Although he lived during the time of Diocletian, the execution of this martyr led to his grave magically creating manna. This figure legendarily revived three theology students who had been murdered at an inn. This man also saved the Greek youth Basileos, who became the cupbearer to a heathen emir. In another story, this figure left behind three balls of gold for the three daughters of a poor farmer. This Bishop of Myra donated all of his inheritance to the needy and the poor, which is why he became the patron of gifts. For 10 points, name this Christian saint who became closely associated with Santa Claus.", "Saint Nicholas", "H"]
["Saint Methodius wrote a mystery play dramatizing the preparedness and unpreparedness of peoples of this sort. In one culture, people with this quality are not subject to pater potestas and served a term of office for thirty years in a certain structure in the Forum Romanum. According to a Judgment Day parable named for them, five of them brought enough oil for their torches, while the other five didn't. Theodosius I disbanded a cult of these people who guarded the sacred fire of the Roman goddess of the hearth. Some cultures display soiled bed sheets to show that a newly-wed wife was one of these. For 10 points, name these individuals, 72 of which may or may not be promised to Islamic martyrs.", "Virginity", "H"]
["In Hinduism, this sort of action is performed on Mangalavara before people wear red clothes and offer red flowers to Hanuman. Hindus also perform this action every Ekadashi, the eleventh lunar day. In some circumstances, individuals may pay a fidyah to forego this action that comes between the suhoor and iftar. Jews do this to remember the destruction of the First and Second temples on the 9th of Av, or Tisha B'Av. It is forbidden to do this during Eid Al Adha and Eid Fitr, which commemorates the end of this practice. This practice is the Islamic pillar of sawm. For 10 points, name this action performed by Jesus for 40 days and 40 nights, where he neglected Satan's advice to turn stones into bread.", "Fasting", "H"]
["A book by Michael Baigent and Richard Leigh argues that the Catholic Church had Roland de Vaux fraudently interpret these works. One of these works mentions the Wicked Priest and the Man of Lie, both of whom are opposed by the Teacher of Righeousness. Another one of these works describes a conflict between the sons of Ammon and the sons of Judah and Benjamin. Those two texts are the Commentary on Habbakuk and the War of the Sons of Light and the Sons of Darkness. They were possibly written by the nearby Essenes and were discovered by Bedouins looking for a lost goat. For 10 points, name this collection of writings found in Qumran, named for a nearby body of water.", "Dead Sea Scrolls", "H"]
["One primary source on the teachings of this religion is the Acta Archelai, a chronicle of debates about it. The founder of this religion wrote about Ogias in The Book of Giants, as well as another treatise called Arzhang. This religion divides up their members into the \"Elect Saints,\" who do not eat meat or engage in sin, and the Hearers, who are allowed to sin and incur the darkness of the world. One practitioner of this dualistic religion was Faustus of Mileve, who converted Saint Augustine to it. This religion emphasizes a world of light and a world of darkness that are equally powerful. For 10 points, name this dualistic religion popular in Sassanid Persia.", "Manichaeism", "H"]
["This figure is tied up by a woman who uses seven bowstrings that have not been dried. In one enterprise, this man ravaged crops by attaching torches to the tails of foxes after a man stole his wife. Although he ate honey from the carcass of a lion, he broke his vow to never touch a corpse. A woman from Sorek tied him up with ropes to obtain a bribe from this figure's enemies, many of whom he killed with the jawbone of a donkey. By destroying pillars to collapse the temple of Dagon, this blind man killed himself and his enemies, the Philistines. For 10 points, name this biblical figure from the Book of Judges who lost his strength when Delilah cut his hair.", "Samson", "H"]
["John Colenso was unable to believe in the historicity of this event, which led him to write a \"critical examination\" of the Bible. After this event, one person planted a vine and got drunk shortly afterwards, which leads his three sons to cover him with a garment. This event ends with God proclaiming \"Never again will I curse the ground\" before he sets a rainbow in the sky symbolizing a covenant with humanity. Supposedly, the remains of one tool used in this event ended up at Mount Ararat. Preparations for this event began with the acquisition of two of every unclean animal. For 10 points, name this event described in Genesis that Noah built an ark to survive.", "Genesis flood narrative", "H"]
["A book on this religion that describes how breaths spin the internal wheel of energy is called The Secret of the Golden Flower. A different text from this religion describes a talking skull that asks \"how do you know death is bad?\" That text describes the Mysterious Female from which Heaven and Earth sprang. One figure from this school of thought failed to distinguish whether he was himself or a dreamed butterfly dreaming of himself. Willingly removing one's self from worldly matters stems from this religion's non-action principle, or wu wei. For 10 points, name this religion that reveres the Eight Immortals and the Jade Emperor, a belief system founded by Lao Tzu.", "Taoism", "H"]
["In Kabbalah, the gematria of one of these objects is 620, which links it with the 620 pillars of light. One of these objects represents the Sephirot that stands opposite of the malchut and is called keter. The Karmapa of Buddhism is said to be the holder of a black one of these objects. First Peter describes how pastors will be given one of these things of \"glory\" for preaching. In later Roman times, the god Sol was adorned with one of these objects of \"radiance.\" In Christianity, after one figure dawns a purple robe and puts on one of these objects, Pontius Pilate stated \"Ecce Homo!\" while Roman soldiers stated \"Hail, King of the Jews!\" For 10 points, name this type of headgear, one of which Jesus wore that was made out of thorns.", "Crown", "H"]
["The first one of these structures was built with palm tree trunks over a stony foundation and had a roof so low that one could touch the palm leaves. In medieval times, one could only spit to the left while inside of these structures. Rows inside these structures are called spolia. Open-air ones of these structures that exist in the countryside include the idgah and musallah. To enter one of these structures, one must step inside with the right foot first. Rather large ones of these contain a courtyard called sahn, which often contains a fountain of flowing water for wudu. In these buildings, the mihrab indicates the direction of Mecca. For 10 points, name these Islamic places of worship.", "Mosque", "H"]
["This work's narrator consumes a little book that a heavenly figure had given to him, which he notes was as sweet as honey. Chapter 10 of this book opens the descent of a figure that is adorned with a rainbow on his head and has feet that are made out of pillars of fire. In this text, men fall ill as the star Wormwood falls into a body of water. Another section describes the word \"mystery\" that can be seen on the forehead of a woman who fornicated with all kings of this earth. This book includes a part wherein God states \"I am Alpha and Omega.\" It was written by John of Patmos and describes the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. For 10 points, name this final book of the New Testament.", "Book of Revelation", "H"]
["Caleb gave Othniel a field of springs during one of these events. Mormon women must wear a fig-leaf apron and long sleeves during a happening of this sort. After one of these happenings, housework is avoided until the leaf paste fades from the hands and feet of people involved. One Hindu occasion of this type has people walk around a circle of fire seven times, while people stand under the chuppah in Jewish tradition. Near the end of a Jewish type of this event, you might see the signing of the ketubah and the crushing of a glass. In Hinduism, it might also end with the application of a powdered red dot on the forehead of a woman. For 10 points, name this type of ceremony that signals the union of a couple of people.", "Wedding", "H"]
["Annemarie Schimmel wrote a book analyzing his role as a messenger. A film about this man starring Anthony Quinn led to gunmen taking over three buildings in Washington D.C. during the 1977 Hanafi Siege. Some sources say the Jewess Zeynab fed this man a poisoned lamb. During one enterprise, this man sees the brother of Moses named Harun, who has a long white beard. He visits a lote tree while travelling through the seven heavens. In order to show that he was a prophet, God split the moon into two parts. This man visits heaven on the horse Buraq, which escorted him to Jerusalem during his Night Journey. In art, a veil often covers this man's face, for his followers forbid depictions of his image. For 10 points, name this prophet of Islam.", "Muhammad", "H"]
["According to legend, a queen named Tissarakkha destroyed one of these objects using thorns. The Great Awakening Temple in Bodh Gaya is dedicated to a historic one of these things. One of these objects symbolizes the love of God and is central to a Mormon vision which describes an iron rod along a path. In Augustine's Confessions, the young narrator goes to a neighbor's land and completely devalues one of these objects. David's son Absalom died because his hair got caught in one of these objects. Tradition states that the Buddha received enlightenment after meditating for a week next to a Bodhi one of these. For 10 points, name these objects, one of which representing knowledge can be found at the center of the Garden of Eden.", "Tree", "M"]
["Aside from Song of Songs, this is the only biblical book which does not mention God. In this book, Zeresh's husband tries to reward the man who thwarted Bigthana and Teresh by constructing a gallows fifty cubits high. At the beginning of this book, (*) Vashti refuses to appear at a banquet naked. When the name of one character in this book is said, Jews boo and shake groggers to drown it out; that man is the wicked advisor Haman. The title character of this book is selected to marry Ahasuerus and is helped by her uncle Mordechai. For ten points, name this book, sometimes called the Megillah, which is read on Purim.", "Book of Esther", "M"]
["Andreas of Caesarea wrote several commentaries on this book, which in one section describes how water became bitter after the star Wormwood fell on the Earth. The second and third chapters of this book include epistles to the seven churches of Asia, and it describes an evil woman named the Whore of Babylon. The author of this book recounts seeing a seven-headed dragon, and it features a series of trumpet blasts and the opening of the seven seals. Written by John of Patmos, For 10 points, name this final book of the Bible about the apocalypse.", "Book of Revelation", "M"]
["Devadatta plotted to kill this figure by releasing a drunken elephant, and this figure rejected asceticism after nearly drowning in a river. He became sick after consuming the meal served by Kunda, and this figure refused the crown of Magadha after traveling there with his horse Kanthaka. He gave his first sermon in the Deer Park, and he left his princely life after seeing an old man, a sick man, and a corpse. He once meditated under a Bodhi tree. For 10 points, name this \"Enlightened One\" who was the first to achieve nirvana, the founder of a namesake religion.", "Gautama Buddha", "M"]
["During weddings in this religion, two crystallized sugar cones are rubbed together. The seventh obligatory feast of this religion is Noruz, the New Year, and its advocates believe in crossing the Chinvat Bridge after death. The worship of this religion takes place in Fire Temples, and this religion places its dead on Towers of Silence to naturally decay and be eaten by scavenger birds. Angra Mainyu is responsible for death in this religion, whose major text is Avesta. For 10 points, name this dualistic religion centered on Ahriman and Ahura Mazda, which was founded in Persia.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["In one vision, this figure described a monster with three ribs in its mouth and another with \"great iron teeth\" that had ten horns. He described four kingdoms while interpreting a dream involving a figure made of gold, silver, bronze, and iron. He was nearly executed for praying three times a day, but was saved through divine intervention. Three of his companions survived being thrown into a fire for refusing to worship an idol, and he famously interpreted mysterious writings that foretold the fall of Babylon. For 10 points, name this figure who survived a night in a lions' den, the subject of his namesake book in the Old Testament.", "Daniel", "M"]
["For each participant in this practice, an animal is slaughtered and shipped to the poor. Another part of this action is known for having large crowds trying to cross the Jamarat Bridge, and this rite also involves drinking from the Zamzam Well and wearing white garments, or ihram, to symbolize purity. Participants in this action throw seven pebbles each at three walls, which is known as the Stoning of the Devil, and it involves participants pointing at or touching the Black Stone while circling the Kaaba seven times. For 10 points, name this pillar of Islam which requires Muslims to go on a pilgrimage to Mecca.", "Hajj", "M"]
["Only two photographs of this religion's founder are known to exist, which are infrequently viewed when not on pilgrimage. A Guardian of this religion attempted to expand it during the Ten Year World Crusade. One text of this religion observed by Shoghi Effendi was written in response to questions from two prominent Sufis and is titled The Seven Valleys, and this religion has a nineteen-month calendar consisting of nineteen days each. Another text of this religion symbolized by a nine-pointed star is The Book of Certitude. For 10 points, name this religion governed from the Universal House of Justice, which was founded by the B\u00e1b and Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["This religion's story of creation involves a giant being born from an egg and then molding the earth for 18,000 years. A modern form of sacrifice in this religion involves burning Hell Bank notes, while an ancient one involved setting out slaughtered animals for deities or ancestors on certain dates. This religion's practice of internal alchemy is designed to cultivate compassion, moderation, and humility, which are known collectively as the \"Three Treasures.\" One major concept of this religion is going along with the nature of the world, which is known as wu wei. For 10 points, name this Chinese religion founded by Laozi, whose name means \"the way.\"", "Taoism", "M"]
["This figure once lectured to a crowd that \"he that hath two coats, let him give to him that hath none\" after calling them a \"brood of vipers.\" The Gospel of Matthew identifies this figure with the prophet Elijah, although he denies this connection in a different gospel. This figure's mother was Elizabeth, and his birth was foretold by an angel that struck Zechariah dumb as punishment for disbelieving his prediction. His decapitation was ordered by Herod Antipas after Salome asked for his head. Sometimes known as the \"Precursor,\" For 10 points, name this religious figure who baptized Jesus Christ.", "John the Baptist", "M"]
["The fourth of this religion's early leaders wrote four hymns used in marriage rites, and his successor compiled the first edition of this faith's book of scripture before being martyred by Murtaza Khan. Adherents to this religion are instructed to avoid Kam, Lobh, Krodh, Moh, and Ahankar, and groom themselves with a wooden comb known as a Khanga twice a day as part of the \"Five Ks.\" An iron bowl is used to induct adherents of this religion into its Khalsa order, and its central text is the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this Indian religion centered in Punjab that was founded by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["This faith's scripture asserts belief in \"the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, [and] healing,\" and members of this faith are instructed to abstain from \"hot drinks.\" The title \"prophet, seer, and revelator\" is given to members of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in this faith. Its Articles of Faith are included in The Pearl of Great Price, and golden plates written in \"reformed Egyptian\" that belonged to the angel Moroni were the basis of its sacred text. For 10 points, name this Christian denomination based on the teachings of Joseph Smith.", "Mormonism", "M"]
["Samaritans make pilgrimages to Mount Gerizim on this holiday. The Maharal of Prague hypothesized that cups of a beverage traditionally imbibed during it represent women from this holiday's religion. One traditional food item is consumed while reclining during this holiday, although women may be required to sit upright, and that item must be eaten before midnight. In some cases, chametz may be symbolically sold to gentiles rather than burned prior to it. The Four Questions and matzo are parts of this holiday. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday celebrating an event that saw houses marked with lamb's blood spared from the tenth plague.", "Passover", "M"]
["One line in this work states that \"he who shall have done an atom's weight of good shall behold it.\" Another part says that Joseph would have succumbed to Potiphar's wife \"had he not been shown a sign from his Lord.\" People who memorize this work are known as hafiz and are permitted to intercede on the behalf of ten people at Judgment Day. The Cave of Hira was the first site of the revelations said to be recorded verbatim in this work, and its chapters include \"The Cow,\" \"The Cave,\" and \"The Night Journey.\" For 10 points, name this work divided into 114 suras and revealed by the archangel Jibreel to Muhammad, the holy book of Islam.", "Quran", "M"]
["In one document important to this religion, Solomon convinces the Queen of Sheba to cease worshiping the Sun. This religion's sacred texts include the Kebra Nagast, and sects of this religion are known as 'mansions,' one of which is the Nyahbingi Order. Robert Rogers wrote the Holy Piby for this religion, whose members use the phrase \"I and I\" in place of \"we.\" Adherents of this religion worship a single deity known as \"Jah,\" and its ceremonies include Grounation Day. For 10 points, name this religion closely associated with dreadlocks and cannabis.", "Rastafari", "H"]
["This group rotates an egg clockwise six times and counterclockwise once before breaking it on the side of a doorway in order to get rid of the evil eye. The time between noon and 4pm is off limits for ceremonies in this community, in which expectant mothers break off the tip of a sweet known as a larvo and give it to childless married women to help them conceive. A candle known as a divo is lit twenty-four hours a day in the households of this group, which added an embolismic month to create the Kadmi calendar. The scientifically minded among this group, the larger counterpart of the (*) Irani, have installed solar panels and engage in captive breeding of vultures to enhance the decomposition process in dakhmas. This community came to be after choosing emigration over paying the jizya or converting to Islam following the Arab conquest of their homeland. For 10 points, name these modern-day constructors of towers of silence, Indian Zoroastrians.", "Parsi", "H"]
["One saint from this city battled Arianism by convincing a woman named Ingunthis to convert her Visigothic husband Hermenegild. A religious festival in this city is organized by religious \"brotherhoods\" and involves sets of images called pasos that proceed down the \"carrera oficial,\" or Official Path. A saint from this city, the brother of the aforementioned Saint Leander, created a policy requiring the establishment of seminaries in cathedral cities while presiding over the Fourth Council of (*) Toledo and is the patron saint of the internet. This city's cathedral, the largest Gothic one in the world, has a bell tower called the Giralda that was converted from a minaret. For 10 points, name this home of Church Doctor Saint Isidore, the site of Spain's largest Holy Week Easter celebration and chief city of Andalusia.", "Seville", "H"]
["This deity broke Vasishta's curse on the eight Vasus by incarnating a beautiful woman, marrying King Shantanu, and murdering seven of their sons, sparing the life of the eighth, Bhishma. In another story, Bhagiratha was able to perform the sraddha ceremony after this deity emerged from Vishnu's big toe. This goddess once deposited the semen from the lovemaking of Shiva and Parvati, her sister, resulting in the birth of Kartikeya. In art, this goddess is depicted wearing a white crown, holding a white lily and a water pot, and riding a crocodile. She attempted to (*) descend from heaven, threatening to engulf the earth and carry it with her into Patala, but Shiva agreed to use his hair to break her fall, splitting her into seven streams. For 10 points, name this Hindu goddess, the personification of a namesake holy river.", "Ganges", "H"]
["One form of this practice fell out of favor after a treatise by Maimonedes argued against Ezra's proclamation that this practice must be done to end Keri. One form of this practice, which requires passing an object between the hands several times in a practice called negel vasser, ends with the Asher yatzar prayer. Traditionally, hair may not be braided during another form of this practice, which must be done in order to end a time known as (*) niddah. Converts to Judaism must undergo a form of this practice that encompasses the whole body within a mikvah. For 10 points, name this ritual practice in Judaism that takes two forms: tevilah, which involves the whole body, and netilat yadayim, which involves just the hands, both of which require the use of water.", "Ritual", "H"]
["Tie-head, or Afro-Barbadian, churches allocate a namesake \"ground\" for this practice, which is performed by a new initiate for seven to ten days after baptism by \"living water.\" Muslims give alms in the form of kosai and masa, or bean cakes and pancakes, during this practice, for which Allah hears special prayers known as fidan. Thirteen days of doing this practice are followed by a sraddha ceremony, which involves a fire sacrifice and rice offerings, among observant Hindus, who are not permitted to shave and must definitely eat (*) vegetarian, if they do not already do so, during this practice. A single tear on an outer garment must be made during the Shiva, or seven days of this practice in Judaism, during which the Kaddish prayer is repeatedly said. Hindus doing this wear white soon after the cremation ceremony is over. For 10 points, name this practice for which women wear a black veil after a funeral.", "Mourning", "H"]
["This group's main antagonist controlled an early publishing house called the Print Yard, which revised a number of religious books under the tutelage of a man named \"Epiphany.\" This group insisted that the \"but\" in the creed \"begotten but not made\" was important and refused to conduct a procession in a counterclockwise fashion. The Zealots of Piety opposed this group, which was split into \"priested\" and \"priestless\" denominations and disliked the changed spelling of the name of (*) Jesus and the reduction of the number of prosphora from seven to five. This group, which was formed in an event known as the raskol, was angered by the reforms of Patriarch Nikon. For 10 points, name this group of Eastern Orthodox Russians who split from the church in 1666 to carry on their traditional ways.", "Old Believers", "H"]
["In one myth, a palace consisting of silver overlay and gold bricks is built for this god after a fire rages for six days. Despite brandishing a knife and a dagger, this god spares two messengers who were sent to spy on him after he denounced his enemy, who had sex with the Lady from the Sea. In another myth, this god coupled with a calf to prepare for a trip to the underworld, where he was trapped after partaking in a feast of mud. Tablets unearthed at Ras Shamra tell of the cycle of this god, who murders one of his enemies with two divine clubs but is temporarily bested by (*) Mot. This god is given his own place of residence after his father El is persuaded by his sister, Anat. This god had earlier accepted El's task of slaying the tyrant Yam. For 10 points, name this Semitic god, whose followers in Canaan were repeatedly vilified in the Hebrew Bible", "Baal", "H"]
["This faith believes that the creator of the world fell from the sky into an inferno, which allowed him to obtain the power to glorify the throne of heaven and the skies. A reliable source for this faith is The Interrogation of John and the book Adam and Eve, a text by Jeremias that describes how God is invisible. The namesake of this belief system was an obscure man whose name meant \"Beloved of God\" and spent times preaching against the rich. Before the last of this faith converted to Islam in the fourteenth century, numerous calls for its (*) destruction were pronounced due to its lack of discernible clergymen. At its core, it emphasizes that Satan created the world and that he is the brother of Jesus Christ. This movement, which drew inspiration from Paulicianism, inspired the later Catharism movement. For 10 points, name this dualistic religion popular in medieval Bulgaria.", "Bogomilism", "H"]
["One of these works of art includes a train with coaches for mail, ladies only, smoking, non-smoking, and chapel. One of these works of art contains two red crosses commemorating the dedicatee's mother's service in the Red Cross. One of these artworks functions as a clock that contains a stationary bottom part with a diamond hour-hand shaped like a bow and arrow and a mobile top part adorned with lilies that spins to tell the time. The largest of these artworks contains a scale depiction of the Cathedral of the Assumption topped with an enormous gold dome, sits on a white onyx plinth, and plays the \"Cherubim hymn.\" These works, some of which were made for the (*) Kelch family, contain a \"surprise,\" which was often a miniature portrait or a mechanical animal inside. For 10 points, name these Easter gifts given to the Russian czars by a namesake family of jewelers.", "Faberg\u00e9 egg", "H"]
["Lawrence A. Englander penned a \"Mystical Study\" of this book, a close reading of center portion of the fragmentary Midrash ha-Ne'elam from the Zohar. The final verse of this book traces \"the generations of Pharez\" all the way to David. In the last chapter of this book, ten elders arbitrate proceedings in which a man takes off his shoe and gives it to his neighbor to confirm that he is relinquishing his right of redemption to his kinsman. One character in this book calls herself (*) Mara to reflect her bitterness at the deaths of Mahlon, Chilion, and Elimelech. The title character of this book uncovers the feet of a sleeping gleaner, who then spreads his cloak around her, uniting the two in marriage. Its title character says \"your people shall be my people, and your God, my God,\" refusing to abandon her mother-in-law Naomi as she returns to Bethlehem from Moab. For 10 points, name this short Old Testament book whose title devoted woman marries Boaz.", "Book of Ruth", "H"]
["In one account of this ritual, Gotteschalk of Volmarstein saw an infant as it was being carried out. Caesarius of Heisterbach wrote a book relating stories about this ritual, during which Bononillo's starved mule bowed in reverence during a contest in another story. In another story about this ritual, a family threw a dying man's vomit into a fire, only to see one of its contents, which was administered as Viaticum, (*) unscathed by the fire and surrounded by light. The phrase \"in a way surpassing understanding\" underscores the Catholic view of this ritual, which centers on the \"real presence\" of a certain person in the host. For 10 points each, name this Christian ritual in which parishioners consume the body and blood of Jesus Christ during Mass", "Eucharist", "H"]
["In order to illustrate this concept, one authority brought a purse full of gold before an audience, asking them what it was worth; hearing \"a lot,\" he then emptied the contents of the purse and repeated his question. Hymns to this concept celebrate a trait that is \"more spacious than the Heavens\" and regard it as \"more honorable than the Cherubim, and more glorious beyond compare than the Seraphim.\" It is also celebrated in the hymn \"Sub tuum praesidium,\" which goes \"Beneath thy compassion, we take refuge.\" Cyril of Alexandria mounted a spirited defense of this doctrine. The liturgical year contains feasts dedicated to the nativity, presentation, (*) annunciation, and dormition of this concept. This doctrine was affirmed at the 431 council at Ephesus over the loud objections of Patriarch Nestorius, who preferred \"Christ-bearer\" to it. For 10 points, name this Eastern Orthodox title for the Virgin Mary, which emphasizes her role as \"God-bearer.\"", "Theotokos", "H"]
["In an initiation into a \"cult\" named for these objects, Koyemsis shriek at the blood produced when children are whipped. Barton Wright classifies the production of these objects into Early Traditional, Late Traditional, Early Action, and Late Action periods. Several of them are presented to brides in the midsummer Niman ceremony. One category of these objects gets increasingly more three-dimensional in four successive stages as they are awarded to infants, toddlers, slightly older toddlers, and finally boys and girls who are two years old; those objects are typically hung from rafters of (*) homes. The wuya and the tithu are specialized kinds of these objects. Murals in kiva rooms depicted the likenesses of these objects, which are imitated by namesake masked dancers. They represent spirits or features from the natural world. For 10 points, name these spiritually significant dolls in Hopi religion.", "The Kachina Doll Mystery", "H"]
["According to Ad-Darimi's musnad, this figure passes gas before leaving a house where the Al-Baqarah sura is being recited. This figure caused a man to utter \"have you thought upon Al-Lat and Al-Uzza / and Manat, the third, the other,\" resulting in great favor with the Meccans. This figure asked Allah for respite until the judgment day and has no authority over ubud. This figure considered himself (*) superior to Adam, who was made from clay, since he himself was made of smokeless fire. This figure, who whispers into the ears of men, influenced Hagar, Ishmael, and Abraham, which is punished by having stones pelted at him seven times during the Hajj. For 10 points, name this figure, also known as Iblis, the namesake of some sacrilegious verses of the Quran.", "Devil", "H"]
["In Islam, this type of activity can be done in its tamattu form, although ifraad and qiran are also acceptable but do not require shaving or clipping hair. In Shintoism the formation of junpai facilitated this kind of activity, which is most often performed to earn the good graces of the seven gods of luck. In Judaism oftentimes this action would involve taking off your sandals at Mount Scopus, and viewing the \"Holy of Holies.\" The Stoning of the Devil and the circling of the well of Zamzam also comprise this type of activity. For British Christians, this activity might involve seeing St. David's Church or St. George's Church. For 10 points, identify this religious practice exemplified by the hajj, which is a spiritual journey.", "Pilgrimage", "H"]
["One of these figures stabbed the extremely fat Eglon while a crowd thought Eglon was relieving himself. A lesser known one of these figures vowed to sacrifice the first thing he saw and then spotted his daughter. That figure later killed those who could not pronounce the word \"Shibboleth.\" One of these figures tells a riddle whose answer refers to honey in a lion's carcass. Another of these figures asked for a sign from God by putting out a wool fleece and later used trumpets to confuse the Midianites. The most famous of these figures is last seen destroying the temple of Dagon after being blinded by the Philistines due to the treachery of Delilah. For 10 points, identify this group of Biblical leaders which included Gideon and Samson, who led Israel in their namesake book after the death of Joshua.", "Book of Judges", "H"]
["A satire of this faith says its founder took it from a \"sawdust mine\" to \"a Klondike,\" perhaps a reference to its founder's studying with the unheralded Phineas Quimby. Despite internal controversy, it uses the book The Destiny of the Mother Church, while a more important text ends with a chapter called \"Fruitage.\" Two members of this faith named Twitchell were prosecuted by Massachusetts in 1988 after the death of their daughter. Branches of this faith typically operate \"reading rooms\" in their community. Its most important book has a second half titled Key to the Scriptures. This faith believes that sickness is the result of fear or sin and thus generally discourage utilizing medicine. For 10 points, name this faith founded by Mary Baker Eddy.", "Christian Science", "H"]
["One of the more notable examples of these figures rides a dragon and carries a viper in his right hand and answers all questions about the past, present and future \u0096 that one is named Astaroth. Because Tobias burns a fish to emit vapors, he scares away another one of these figures in the Book of Tobit. Two hundred of these figures are described in the Book of Enoch, which refers to them as Grigori or the watchers. In addition to Asmodeus, other examples of them include Abaddon the exterminator. Medieval folk believed in incubi and succubi, two rather malevolent types of them as well. These beings first came into existence after \"The Fall,\" in which around a third of them left heaven. For 10 points, name these fallen angels, which are commanded by Satan.", "Demon", "H"]
["In one story, this figure lets saliva run down his beard to fool king Achish. In another story, he creeps into a cave to cut off a corner of a king's robe while he is urinating. This man gave his father-in-law 200 enemy foreskins so he could marry Michal. He deceived the priests of Nob to eat consecrated bread, which later resulted in their execution. One of this man's daughters was raped by his son, Amnon. He had a tearful farewell in a field with his friend Jonathan, the son of his rival. He is later betrayed by his advisor Ahithophel and his son Absalom. This son of Jesse used his skill at playing the harp to sooth his predecessor as king, Saul. He later defeated a warrior from Gath with his sling. For 10 points, name this biblical king who slew Goliath.", "David", "H"]
["This man once told a crowd that \"the man with two tunics should share with him who has none.\" Because this man's father had been struck mute, his father had to use a writing tablet to indicate his name after his birth. While he was still in the womb, he leaped for joy, startling his mother, Elizabeth. This son of Zechariah predicted that someone whose sandals he was not fit to carry would come, and also denied being the Prophet or Elijah. After speaking against the king's marriage to Herodias, he was executed at the request of Salome. This prophet wore clothes of camel hair while eating a diet of locusts and honey in the wilderness. For 10 points, name this prophet who predicted the coming of Jesus and got his name because he submerged people in the River Jordan.", "John the Baptist", "H"]
["This man once told a crowd that \"the man with two tunics should share with him who has none.\" Because this man's father had been struck mute, his father had to use a writing tablet to indicate his name after his birth. While he was still in the womb, he leaped for joy, startling his mother, Elizabeth. This son of Zechariah predicted that someone whose sandals he was not fit to carry would come, and also denied being the Prophet or Elijah. After speaking against the king's marriage to Herodias, he was executed at the request of Salome. This prophet wore clothes of camel hair while eating a diet of locusts and honey in the wilderness. For 10 points, name this prophet who predicted the coming of Jesus and got his name because he submerged people in the River Jordan.", "John the Baptist", "H"]
["In one scene in this book, characters sing a song talking about God's anger consuming enemies \"like stubble\" as well as praising the \"blast\" from God's nostrils. In another scene, Jethro arrives to tell a figure he must decrease his workload. One figure in this book is about to be killed by God, but is saved when Zipporah circumcises him. In one crucial scene, a character's brother offers the weak explanation that he threw jewelry into a fire, producing a golden idol. Workers are ordered to make bricks without straw, while one figure is called to duty by a burning bush. This book describes ten plagues, ending with the death of the firstborn. For 10 points, name this biblical book which describes Passover and the Jewish escape from Egypt.", "Book of Exodus", "H"]
["The Kalpasutra is a document that details this religion's practices. That text was authored by a man, whose brother Varamihara was an astrologer whose actions made him convert to this religion. This religion's holy week of Paryushan ends with the Pratikraman prayer. Participants of this religion may undergo Santhara to die at the end of life. Bhadrabahu divided this religion into two groups, one of which wears only white clothing, Yatis adherents of this religion cover their mouths to avoid harming insects and adherents of this religion are strict vegetarians, both of which are illustrative of this religion's principles of non-violence called ahimsa. For 10 points, name this religion that follows the teachings of Mahavira, the first Tirthankara.", "Jainism", "H"]
["This text makes the claim that men who are thrust down into hell, men who deny not the Holy Spirit and men who did not receive the gospel of Christ have glory equal to that of the stars, which it terms \"telestial.\" It notes that evil men don't give good gifts and that the skin of evil people was blackened. One of its figures notes that his father \"dwelt in a tent\" and that his descendants fought the Lamanites. It relates the Testimony of the Eight Witnesses and describes Jacob, who is the brother of Nephi. This work describes Moroni, who titles its last section, who inspired its creation. This work's author owned a seerstone before his First Vision and named its locations after places in New York. For 10 points, name this text supposedly translated from golden tablets by Joseph Smith.", "Book of Mormon", "H"]
["In October of 1985, members of this religion were given a document that foretold the coming of a \"Supreme Tribunal\" that would advise all kings and leaders. That document, which praised the formation of the League of Nations, cited this religion's founder, who foretold the \"planetization of mankind\". That founder of this religion spent four months in the Black Pit and wrote its sacred text the Kitab-i-Aqdas while in exile in Acre. Houses of worship in this religion are nine-sided and have a central dome. A shrine to its founder was built by the Guardian Shoghi Effendi at Haifa. This religion believes that there was a series of Messengers of God from Abraham to the Bab. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Baha'u'llah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["The founder of this movement wrote that his mission was to travel throughout the country, preaching to the \"elect seeds of God.\" One of its earliest leaders looked a lot like Jesus Christ, so he re-enacted Christ's entry into Jerusalem while on a donkey at Bristol. That man, James Nayler, is one of the Valiant Sixty. Many Nicholites converted to this faith whose evangelical arms arose after the Gurneyite and Wilburite separations. One text of this faith advocates internal spiritual struggle and verbal debate and adherents believe the Bible is not authoritative. The Hicksites separated to form an Orthodox group in this sect that emphasizes the Inner Light. For 10 points, name this pacifist religion founded by George Fox whose members call themselves \"Friends.\"", "Quakers", "H"]
["This religion believes that one may \"overstand\" something while not understanding it. Its eating practices are heavily based on Revelation 22:2, which speaks of the \"leaves of the tree\" and the \"healing of the nation.\" It is based on the teachings of Howell and meets for Groundings where reasonings occur. Its adherents celebrate the holiday of Nyabingi and follow a strict dietary code known as Ital. The Lion of Judah is sacred to this religion along with texts like The Promise Key and The Holy Piby. Babylon is an oppressive force that is contrasted with Zion in this religion that reveres Hailie Selassie. For 10 points, name this Jah-worshipping religion that ritually smokes ganja.", "Rastafari", "H"]
["In Tibetan Buddhism, a material made from colostrum indicates the importance of this practice, and they practice a \"spiritual\" type of it to generate an \"inner heat.\" Women practice this act on Karva Chauth, and most Hindus perform it on Durga Puja and for the New Moon. In another religion, this action is done in between suhoor and iftar. Many Mormons partake in one type of it during the first Sunday of every month. This practice is central to Tisha B'Av is a means of atonement during Yom Kippur. Muslims do it from sun-up to sundown during a period of time that culminates with Eid ul-Fitr. For 10 points, name this religious act of individual sacrifice that Muslims perform during Ramadan.", "Fasting", "H"]
["One leader of this religion was known as \"Gus Dur\" and founded the National Awakening Party. The Hongwu Emperor wrote \"The Hundred-Word Eulogy\" in praise of this religion, but the majority of insurgents in the Panthay and Dungan revolts were adherents of it. This was the religion of Ma Huan, who wrote the book The Overall Survey of the Ocean Shores while serving the Yongle Emperor. The Chinese admiral Zheng He was born into a family who practiced this religion, while the Hui and Uyghur people predominantly adhere to it. People who follow this faith eat food certified as \"halal.\" For 10 points, name this religion practiced by 88.2% of the population of Indonesia, most of whom adhere to the Sunni tradition.", "Islam", "H"]
["In Nepal, this period is marked by adorning puppies with garlands, and the goddess of death is honored on its fourth day. Some people whitewash their houses during it, and doorways are often decorated with rangolis during this holiday. Brothers give a gift to their sisters during this holiday, and this holiday often marks the beginning of a new year for merchants. Parts of this holiday celebrate Bali's return to rule the earth and the defeat of Naraka, and many people gamble with dice during this holiday. Modern celebrations of this holiday involve many firecrackers, and a special Pooja to Lakshmi is performed during it. Many kandils, or lanterns, are lit during this period. For 10 points, name this Hindu festival during which the goddess of wealth is honored by using lights.", "Diwali", "H"]
["Plaques upon which members of this religion place prayers or wishes typically depict horses. Members of this religion are told to follow its \"four affirmations.\" Objects are dipped into a pot of boiling water in one of this religion's dance rituals. One deity in this religion was banished after vomiting in order to feed the moon. Places of worship in this religion are maintained by a kannushi and are called jinja, inside which the honden can be found. This religion's sun deity was born from the left eye of Izanagi and, after her brother Susanoo went on a rampage, hid in a cave. For 10 points, Kami are worshiped in what Japanese religion?", "Shinto", "H"]
["Several Irish monastic texts claim this practice was introduced by the Scythian king Fenius Farsaid. Ogma is another figure credited with creating it. In Chinese myth, millet rained down on earth and ghosts cried when a man with four eyes created this practice after being pressured by the Yellow Emperor. Hermes was inspired by the flight formation of cranes and the work of Palamedes of Nauplia to create it. Herodotus claimed Cadmus brought this practice to Greece. In Egypt, the ibis became a symbol of this practice because of its association with Thoth. For 10 points, name this practice which may use hieroglyphics or an alphabet.", "Writing", "H"]
["This man became angry after hearing his brother request to marry Abishag the Shunammite. He then secured the throne by executing his scheming brother Adonijah. This man sent a message to king Hiram, saying that no one was \"skilled in felling timber as the Sidonians.\" As king, he killed his father's general, Joab, and he was succeeded by his incompetent son, Rehoboam. This ruler answered some \"hard questions\" from the Queen of Sheba and used cedar from Lebanon to construct the temple in Jerusalem. In one story, this son of Bathsheba makes a wise judgment by threatening to cut a baby in half. For 10 points, name this successor to David as king of Israel, who was noted for his wisdom.", "Solomon", "H"]
["One religious community which, until the last decade, lived almost entirely in this country was mentioned in the Quran along with Jews and Christians as one of the \"People of the Book.\" Those \"Sabians,\" who lived here, revere John the Baptist but reject Jesus, and are now known as this country's minority \"Mandeans.\" Another small religion which exists mostly in this country worships Melek Taus, the peacock god, and is the Yazidis. In 2006, this country, home to the more western large population of Chaldean Christians, was plagued by death squads in the \"Sunni Triangle.\" For 10 points, name this country where the Shia majority was long suppressed under the rule of Saddam Hussein.", "Iraq", "H"]
["Conditions that must accompany this practice, including \"sincerity,\" \"love,\" and \"truthfulness,\" are divided by adherents into seven to nine criteria. Criteria for this practice's validity also include submission to its requirements and perfect knowledge of carrying it out. Without those conditions, this practice, which is promoted by the flag of Saudi Arabia, is considered meaningless and cannot be used for conversion. The first part of this practice is called tawhid, and Shiites add the phrase \"and Ali is his vice-regent\" to the words of this practice. For 10 points, name this pillar of Islam, a declaration often translated, \"there is no God but Allah, and Muhammad is his prophet.\"", "Shahada", "H"]
["Traditions of this holiday include offering toys to please the \"little angels.\" It is connected to the return of the monarch butterflies from migration. On this holiday, families use a crop, tissue paper, water, and a candle to represent the \"four elements\" in an altar set up inside the home. Orange marigolds decorate streets on this holiday, which celebrates the image of \"La Catrina.\" Taking place on All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day, it features the consumption of skull candy and the ubiquitous presence of skeletons. For 10 points, name this holiday that combines Catholic and pre-Columbian traditions, celebrated in Mexico and Central America.", "Day of the Dead", "H"]
["Immediately after this event, its performer traveled to Capernaum, then to the capital to confront some sellers of oxen and doves. The person responsible for this event stated \"Woman, what have I to do with thee?\" and \"My time has not yet come\" while performing it. One person noted that \"you have saved the best til now\" to evaluate the product of this event, which was drawn out of six stone containers used for ritual cleansing. Appearing only in the Gospel of John, this event is considered the first miracle of Jesus. For 10 points, identify this feat which took place at a wedding-feast at Cana, and was the miraculous creation of an alcoholic beverage.", "John 2", "H"]
["One king of this place, Bera, rebels against the Elamite king Kedorlaomer, but is told that another man \"will accept nothing belonging to you, not even a thread or the thong of a sandal.\" One former resident of this place leaves it to go to Zoar, protesting that he cannot reach the mountains. After leaving here, one figure fathers Ben-Ammi and Moab after drunkenly having sex with his two daughters in a cave. In this location, two angels visit a man, who protects them from a crowd that wants to have sex with them. While leaving it, one woman looks behind and turns into a pillar of salt. For 10 points, name this wicked city which Lot flees from, which is destroyed by God along with Gomorrah.", "Sodom", "H"]
["In one of this man's earliest military actions, he commanded his people at Rephidim, a battle at which his forces only did well when his superior's arms were held up. This commander's defeat in his attempted conquest of Ai is attributed to one of his soldiers, Achan, pillaging gold and silver. One of this man's victories against a coalition of Amorite rulers is notable since it is the only occurrence in the Bible in which God kept the sun from setting. He was among the twelve spies sent to report on Canaan; Caleb and this man were the only ones to return with positive reports. For 10 points, name this character in the Old Testament who led the Israelites after the death of Moses.", "Joshua", "H"]
["During the service for this holiday, a priest carves a cross, alpha and omega, and the current year into a candle. \"Sunrise services\" often occur in graveyards on this holiday. In one tradition, this holiday includes a homily written by John Chrysostom and begins with a vigil called the Midnight Office. This holiday takes place on the last day of Triduum. The name of this holiday in some languages is related to that of Passover, from which it was once dated. On the day before this holiday, sacraments can only be administered to the dying. For 10 points, name this Christian holiday that comes immediately after Holy Saturday and two days after Good Friday and celebrates the resurrection of Jesus.", "Easter", "H"]
["The speaker of this text declares, \"the good that I would I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do,\" after noting, \"For we know that the law is spiritual; but I am carnal, sold under sin.\" The speaker downplays the significance of circumcision, saying, \"But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter.\" Later, the speaker of this text asks, \"If God be for us, who can be against us?\" in discussing how faith alone unites a sinner with the sinless Jesus and assures salvation. For 10 points, name this first and longest Pauline epistle, addressed to members of a certain empire.", "Epistle to the Romans", "H"]
["One ritual used by this group involved transferring a ball of rice from the left hand of one official to another. The Genna Martyrdom resulted from a campaign against this people, who were targeted by a ceremonial procedure in which people were forced to trample on stone images. Twenty of the Twenty-Six Martyrs belonged to this group, whose practices have altered significantly in its \"Kakure\" incarnation. This group's symbols were used by the Shimabara Rebellion, after which this group was forced into seclusion even in Nagasaki, where this religious group had been prominent. For 10 points, name this minority religious group that emerged after its first convert, Anjiro, met with the missionary Saint Francis Xavier.", "Christianity in Japan", "H"]
["A set of recently-constructed tunnels connects this structure to the Struthion Pool. A Duke of Arabia named Pangar was executed for refusing to destroy this structure at Vespasian's behest. At any given time, portions of this structure contain thousands of tzetels. Muslims believe that Muhammad tied his steed to a portion of this structure during the Night Journey, giving it the Arabic name al-Buraq. Visitors to this structure often slip prayerful notes into its crevices and mourn the destruction of a proximate building. For 10 points, name this final remaining fragment of the Holy Temple in Jerusalem, a sacred site for Jews.", "Western Wall", "H"]
["One member of this group used his walking stick to bless the chaaju, and another member of this group composed the Baburdani. That one expounded the repetitive chanting of the divine's name, which is known as Naam Japna. Many banis, such as the Sukhmani, were compiled by the fifth member of this group, called Arjan Dev. Another member of this group created the Khalsa, which is formed by all people who obey the five Ks. The last person in this group was Gobind Singh who placed the Adi Granth in this group. For 10 points, name this group, including Nanak, who served as the leaders of Sikhism.", "Sikh gurus", "H"]
["These structures have at least one room with two gigantic wall-mirrors facing each other. At the dedication of each of these structures, a Hosanna shout is performed. Endowment ceremonies in these places precede weddings, which unite a couple into \"celestial marriages\" because of the sealing power that they grant. The basements of many of them contain large water tanks used as baptismal fonts, which may be used on volunteers acting as proxies for (*) dead people. Sacred places for special ordinances are provided by these secretive buildings, which are often topped by golden angel statues. One of the earliest ones was built in Nauvoo under the orders of Joseph Smith. For 10 points, name these holy places in the Church of Jesus Christ Latter Day Saints.", "Temple (Latter Day Saints)", "H"]
["German linguist Theodor Noldeke wrote a popular \"introductory history\" of this book. Though it is not the Kebra Nagast, this book describes a campaign in the Year of the Elephant led by the Christian zealot Abraha. This book holds that mankind was created from a single clot of blood. An oft-memorized passage about a (*) chair that symbolizes God's rule over mankind is found in the second and longest section of this book. Three pagan goddesses are praised in a controversial section of this book known as the Satanic Verses. Sections named Yasin and Fatiha are found in this book, which praises the People of the Book. Compiled into book form by Abu Bakr and divided into suras, for 10 points, name this holy book verbally revealed by Gabriel to the prophet Muhammad.", "Quran", "H"]
["This man argued that miracles were meant to be temporary, lambasting \"counterfeit miracles.\" He wrote about wearing the \"breastplate of righteousness\" and the \"armor of God.\" This man wrote \"continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling,\" and proclaimed \"For all have (*) sinned and fall short of the glory of God.\" His most famous writings include an injunction that wives should submit to their husbands and another which describes love as \"patient\" and \"kind.\" This man had his sight restored by Ananias after being blinded on the road to Damascus, an experience that got him to stop persecuting Christians and to change his name. For 10 points, name this Christian convert, an apostle who wrote many epistles, such as Romans and Corinthians.", "Paul", "H"]
["This tradition uses genealogical charts called Merit Fields or Refuge Trees. A key text of this faith lays out six states of consciousness called bardos. This tradition slowly merged with B\u00f6n and some believers etch words into mani stones to praise the compassionate entity Chenrezig. One honorific in this tradition is (*) \"Rinpoche.\" Devotional tasks in this faith include making detailed circular artwork with colored sand. Many devotees follow the Gelug-pa, or Yellow Hat, sect of this tradition, which uses a non-Egyptian Book of the Dead, makes mandalas, and follows a leader who fled Potala Palace in 1959. For 10 points, name this monastic tradition derived from Vajrayana and Mahayana, whose reincarnated leader is the fourteenth Dalai Lama.", "Tibetan Buddhism", "H"]
["Mernissi's examination of male-female dynamics within this belief system posited that the mother-in-law acts as the key enforcer for unspoken hudud boundaries. Cultures characterized by this belief system sit on one side of the central \"fault line\" according to Huntington's Clash of Civilizations. Clifford Geertz posited a form of \"societal common sense\" to explain how this system evolved in tandem with two geographically distinct civilizations in his text on \"[this] (*) Observed.\" This belief system traditionally takes a very negative view of zina, or extramarital sex, which like other taboos is considered haraam. The hijab is an article of clothing worn by some female practitioners of, for 10 points, what belief system that includes major Sunni and Shi'a divisions?", "Islam", "H"]
["This man was once nearly killed by a bayonet that was thrust upon him by a disciple of Marcel Lefebvre. The Mitrokhin Commission investigated an earlier attempt by a Grey Wolves member to kill this man. This man controversially kissed a Quran after visiting the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus. His predecessor and namesake died six weeks after assuming office, and he established the World Youth Day gatherings. He was almost killed by (*) Mehmet Ali Agca. The bank controlled by this man likely funded a trade-union in his home country called Solidarity. He was the first non-Italian to hold his office since Adrian VI. For 10 points, name this Polish-born pope, the predecessor of Benedict XVI.", "Pope John Paul II", "H"]
["The Bible was translated into this country's language by John Ross. One religion from this country worships the god Hanuellim and inspired the Eastern Learning Uprising and the March 1st movement. In the 1980s, this country, home to the world's largest megachurch, was ruled by a Methodist leader who converted many Buddhist temples into national parks and persecuted monks, infuriating its (*) Jogye Order. Another religion from here outlines its beliefs in the Divine Principle, which states that its leader and his wife are the \"True Parents\" of humanity. This is the birthplace of a religious leader who conducted marriages between hundreds of couples at a time. For 10 points, name this country, home to the Unification Church led by Sun Myung Moon.", "South Korea", "H"]
["Before this event, one participant's shoes are hidden by children and a large fish is made to look like him. One part of it involves placing a foot on a granite stone signifying strength. One participant in this event carries a sword and rides on a white horse with a procession to another participant's home. In this event, a yellow powder called holud is liberally applied to the participants, who take seven steps around a holy fire, making a (*) vow for each step. The participants in this event follow a priest in chanting mantras to Agni. One day after this event, a bed is decorated with flowers for the consummation. For 10 points, name these events at which the female participant wears henna and a red sari and joins her groom in matrimony.", "Hindu wedding", "H"]
["A holiday celebrating this event was added to the calendar by Pope Callixtus III, who wanted to commemorate the breaking of the Siege of Belgrade. That feast day, which takes place on August 6, includes the singing of the Apolytikion and Kontakion in Eastern Orthodoxy. According to Mark, some figures at this event were \"sore afraid.\" One of those figures says \"It is good for us to be here\" and suggests the construction of three (*) tabernacles. It is not the Baptism of Jesus, but a cloud overshadows the witnesses of this event and God points to his \"beloved son... in whom I am well pleased,\" commanding James, John, and Peter to \"hear him.\" For 10 points, name this miracle in which Jesus converses with Elijah and Moses upon Mount Tabor and becomes radiant.", "Transfiguration of Jesus", "H"]
["A rival of this figure once climbed up a peak and hurled a large rock at him, which splintered and made this figure's foot bleed. This man summoned his followers to a lake, held up a certain object without saying a word, and was met with a smile and a laugh by his successor. His mother, Maya, had a vision of a beautiful elephant entering her womb. This man traveled to a deer park to begin his teachings and is considered to be the first (*) arhat. In his adolescence, this deliverer of the \"Flower Sermon\" was disturbed by the sight of an old man, a diseased man, and a corpse. This prompted him to meditate under a Bodhi tree and come up with the Four Noble Truths. For 10 points, name this religious figure who was born Siddhartha Gautama.", "Gautama Buddha", "H"]
["Tertullian distinguished between the kind of this practice that happens before baptism and the more traditional form. It is performed daily by the monks on Mount Athos. Leviticus 16:21 provides the basis for this action by describing how Aaron did it while holding the head of a live goat. It's not Communion, but the Council of Trent declared that Jesus's instruction to (*) \"Receive ye the Holy Ghost\" changed it into a sacrament. The words spoken during it are protected by a \"seal.\" Contrition and satisfaction are two elements of this practice, which begins with a speaker saying how long it has been since this practice was last performed. For 10 points, name this sacrament in which people enter a booth and say, \"Forgive me Father, for I have sinned.\"", "Confession", "H"]
["One part of this object is aligned with Canopus while another is aligned with the sunset of the winter solstice. It stands next to an imprint of a foot in a glass enclosure. Its golden door is surrounded by six tablets and contains three pillars inside. A stripe of marble extends from one side of the silk and gold (*) cloth covering this structure. 360 pagan idols in this structure were destroyed, restoring it to the way Abraham and Ishmael had built it. This object stands about twenty meters from the Zamzam well. One of this object's corners contains the black stone, which is kissed by believers. For 10 points, name this black cube-shaped object located in the Grand Mosque in Mecca, circled repeatedly during pilgrimages.", "Kaaba", "H"]
["This leader is tricked into signing a peace treaty with the Gibeonites and orders the execution of Achan for illegally taking plunder. He is commanded to hold out his javelin towards the city of Ai, a sign that the city will fall into his people's hands. Along with Caleb, he is the only scout to give a positive report regarding the invasion of (*) Canaan. This leader sent in spies to one city, where they met a prostitute named Rahab. In one battle, this man defeated the Amorites after praying for the sun to stand still. He instructed his priests to blow trumpets during his defeat of Jericho. For 10 points, name this man, whose namesake book describes his leadership of the Israelites after Moses.", "Joshua", "H"]
["One often prepares a stew called hamin just before the start of this time period so that it would finish during it. Having marital sex is not melacha during this time period. The song \"l'cha dodi\" is sung just prior to this time period and compares it to a bride. Some families hire a goy to extinguish (*) lighted candles and light a fire in the oven during this time period in Orthodox communities. At this time period's end, a braided candle is dipped in wine when three stars are in the sky during the havdalah ceremony. The Fourth Jewish Commandment mandates observance of this holiday. Often observed as the \"Lord's Day\" in Christianity, for 10 points, name this day of rest in the Jewish week.", "Sabbath", "H"]
["The priest conducting this ceremony addresses the bone-breaker and the green flame to respectively admit that no lies have been told and no food stolen. An \"A\"-shaped object known as a Plummet is used during one step of this process, which takes place in a tent known as an \"ibu.\" This action, which paves the way to the field of reeds if successful, includes a ceremony known as the \"opening of the (*) mouth.\" Bags of natron cover the central figure of this ceremony, in which a long hook is threaded through the nose. Four canopic jars collect the internal organs of the person for whom this ceremony is performed before he is wrapped in linen. For 10 points, a sarcophagus is the final resting place for people who undergo what elaborate Egyptian burial practice?", "Mummy", "H"]
["For one person to whom this happened, it followed twenty-eight hours of that person conversing out loud as if enacting a drama in seventeen parts. This phenomenon uniquely left Rita of Cassia with a fetid body odor; other people with this feature were often reported exuding a natural perfume. This phenomenon and transverberation made a Capuchin friar named Padre Pio internationally famous. After being visited by a six-winged angel atop Mount La Verna, St. (*) Francis of Assisi left, having gained this feature. Mostly afflicting women, this form of suffering originates from Paul's saying that \"I bear on my body the marks of Jesus.\" For 10 points, name these sensations or physical symptoms of Jesus' wounds during the Crucifixion.", "Stigmata", "H"]
["One of these works contains parables comparing the world to a forest of herbs shrouded by a dark cloud and describing how a rich man convinces his children to leave a burning house by bribing them with toys. Another of these works is set after its speaker finishes his daily walk to beg for food and is titled for its ability to (*) cut through illusions and inflictions that cause desire and suffering. That one is sparked by a question asked by Elder Subhuti and is part of the Perfection of Wisdom Genre. Another of them, the basis of the Nichiren sect, focuses on a \"flower of the Wonderful Law.\" They take their name from a word meaning \"to bind\" and include the \"Diamond\" and the \"Lotus.\" For 10 points, name these aphoristic texts venerated in Buddhism.", "Sutra", "H"]
["One recurring story in this tradition concerns a woman who gets stuck in mud after leaving the heavenly realm for the world of matter and births a lion-faced figure of imperfection. One set of people in this tradition, known as the serpent people, are unique for presenting an androgynous concept of Man. Irenaeus dedicated his life to combating this tradition. A library of texts from this tradition was unearthed in (*) 1945 at Nag Hammadi. Sophia is the consort of Jesus in this tradition, which produced the Gospel of Thomas and held that the Demiurge created the universe. For 10 points, name this set of various mystical heresies, denoted by the Greek word for knowledge.", "Gnosticism", "H"]
["Performers of this action might encounter a shalshelet in one of four locations, but more commonly see a pazer or et-nachta while doing it. After this action is finished, a hagba occurs and believers raise their pinky fingers in the air. A pointer called a yad is used during this action, which is usually done on a raised platform called the bimah after a call for blessing known as (*) aliyah. Aided by marks called \"trope,\" this task is done on a different segment, or parshah, each week. For 10 points, name this action performed for the first time in one's life at the bar mitzvah service, the chanting of passages from a holy scroll at a synagogue.", "Yad", "H"]
["One writer with this name urged believers not to be like a man who looks in the mirror and immediately forgets what his face looks like. Another man with this name is executed at the beginning of Acts 12, making him the second Christian to be martyred, after Stephen. This is the name of the first bishop of Jerusalem. Martin Luther attacked a writer with this name as producing an \"epistle of straw\" and wanted it out of the New Testament. One man with this name wrote an epistle which asks \"what (*) good is it, if a man claims to have faith but has no deeds?\" This is the name shared by the oldest brother of Jesus and the patron saint of Spain, who was known as the \"Son of Thunder.\" For 10 points, give this common name held by an apostle who was the brother of John.", "James", "H"]
["This person performed his most famous feat immediately after dismounting from a water buffalo. He was conceived by his mother as she gazed upon a pole star while leaning against a plum tree and stayed in her womb for 62 years. This man taught that \"we join spokes together in a wheel, but it is the center hole that makes the wagon move.\" This man, who formed a close relationship with a sentry in the frontier after escaping the moral decay of city life, came up with an idea known as \"as-it-is-ness,\" or (*) ziran. His major work was commissioned by Yinxi, opens by saying \"A name that can be named is not the Name,\" and teaches inaction, or wu wei. For 10 points, name this figure who wrote the Dao Dejing, the founder of Daoism.", "Laozi", "H"]
["One book by this thinker asserts that men delude themselves into thinking they are good when they are full of disordered desires. This man argued that immoral behavior was punishment from God and original sin resulted from Adam and Eve's pride and foolishness in his Against the Pelagians . This man denounced (*) Rome and Platonism in a work that claims the sinful society of men obscures the true kingdom of God, and his work served as the basis for Aquinas' formulation of just war. Another work by this author outlines his personal conversion from neo-Platonism and Manichaeism to Christianity. For 10 points, name this author of City of God and Confessions, a Doctor of the Church from Hippo.", "Augustine of Hippo", "H"]
["In one tradition, the most severe form of this action involves appearing in a cube known as Avici. In Islam, it happens to people who fail the interrogation of Munkar and Nakir. It follows the narrowing of the Chinvat bridge in Zoroastrianism. The Gospel of Matthew suggests that it is better to cut off one's right hand than to face this circumstance, which is accompanied by (*) \"weeping and gnashing of teeth.\" Under certain conditions, one's accumulated karma can cause this to happen, sending one to Naraka. Medieval artists originated the idea that it involves passing through the mouth of a monster. Occurring after being denied access to the pearly gates, for 10 points, name this less favorable of two post-death outcomes in many religions.", "Going to Hell", "H"]
["For the past 26 years, Ruben Enaje has conducted unsanctioned reenactments of this event in the Philippines. Tradition holds that a repentant figure at this event was named Dismas. As it took place, an earthquake happened and a curtain was torn. At this event, several officers cast lots for the (*) clothing of the central figure. Just before it, the central figure walked down the Via Dolorosa. This event proceeded after people demanded Barabbas to be released. Near the end of this event, its central figure proclaimed \"My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?\" before his body was placed in the custody of Joseph of Arimathea by order of Pontius Pilate. For 10 points, name this event that took place on Mount Calvary and is commemorated on Good Friday.", "Crucifixion of Jesus", "H"]
["One king converted to this religion after the dust on the windows overlooking his seraglio was untouched, proving that its holy men stay put in their spots in the royal court. Whether or not a set of scriptures survived a famine that killed many of its monks is a point of contention in this religion, whose devotees follow \"five great vows.\" One controversial practice in this religion is fasting to (*) death, which was how Chandragupta Maurya died. A whisk to sweep the ground ahead is one of few objects possessed by a sect of \"sky-clad\" monks in this religion. Divided into the Svetambaras and Digambaras, it reveres 24 tirthankaras and focuses on the tenet of ahimsa. For 10 points, name this Indian religion founded by Mahavira, which preaches nonviolence.", "Jainism", "H"]
["The second pope of this name attempted to quash the conciliar movement with the bull Execrabilis. The fourth pope of this name issued the Tridentine Creed, and the fifth pope of this name excommunicated Elizabeth I. The sixth and seventh popes of this name were both taken prisoner and exiled by Napoleonic forces. David Dalin and John Cornwell each wrote studies of another pope of this name. One pope of this name reigned for a (*) record thirty-one years and, between 1860 and 1870, lost the Papal States to unification forces. For 10 points, identify this papal name borne by the \"prisoner of the Vatican\" and by Eugenio Pacelli, the so-called \"Hitler's Pope\" who reigned during World War II.", "Pius", "H"]
["After lying that she was Abraham's sister rather than his wife, Sarai and her family were banished from this place. One inhabitant of this place has a dream in which birds eat baked goods out of a basket on his head while another dreams about seven fat and seven thin cows. When visiting this country, one character has a (*) silver cup placed in his sack, resulting in him being taken prisoner. A man dies in this country as he blesses his sons Reuben and Benjamin. After being seduced by Potiphar's wife, Joseph is imprisoned here and achieves a high position under the king. This country is ravaged by plagues of locusts, hail, and the deaths of its firstborn. For 10 points, name this country in which the Israelites were slaves until being freed by Moses", "Ancient Egypt", "H"]
["One section of this work states that one should praise the talented but not \"put away\" the incompetent, because everyone has a role. An early section of this work compares virtue to the pole star, because all other stars turn towards it. This book bashes a figure who isolated himself after noting how disorder permeated society. It lists stinginess and oppression as two of the four \"bad practices\" to contrast with the \"five excellent practices\" required of (*) rulers. Another section states that fraternal submission and filial piety are two qualities required of a gentleman, or Junzi. It consists of 20 books compiled by the students of its central figure during the Warring States Period. For 10 points, name this collection of the sayings of Confucius.", "Analects", "H"]
["One man with this first name has an affair with his sister, Bernice, and sarcastically asks Paul if he thinks he can persuade him to be a Christian. Another man with this name is hailed as a god, not a man, which results in him being \"eaten by worms\" and dying. The father of the most famous one was Idumean and married an Arabian woman named Cyprus. Besides (*) Agrippa and Antipas, this name was held by a ruler who became entranced by the dancing of his wife's daughter and ordered an execution. This was the first name of the king who executed John the Baptist and a ruler who lied to the Magi that he wanted to worship the newborn Christ. For 10 points, give this name shared by various kings of Judea, including one who ordered the massacre of the innocents.", "Herod", "H"]
["One of this man's students published the work Icons of Evolution and is a member of the Discovery Institute named Johnathan Wells. Carlton Sherwood's Inquisition details an incident where this man was jailed for 13 months for tax evasion. This man once hosted a ceremony in which in he which he placed a 'Crown of Peace' on his head. This man's Tongil Group is a large weapons manufacturer, though he operates multiple Peace Cups, Peace Academies, and appoints Ambassadors for Peace. This man believes himself to be the second coming of Christ and conducts ceremonies in which participants strike each other three times and symbolically reverse Adam and Eve's fall from grace. For 10 points, name this South Korean businessman and religious leader who created the Unification Church and holds mass weddings.", "Sun Myung Moon", "H"]
["The spring festival in this religion sees the throwing of beans, and another festival usually ends with the buying of \"thousand-year candy\". Weddings in this religion require the bride and groom to take three sips of alcohol from each of three bowls, and October is considered the \"godless month\" in this religion. People who fail to get their names on a list at a house of worship in this religion become \"water children\" upon death. One important holy site of this religion is torn down and rebuilt every 20 years, and adherents often tie paper fortunes to an edifice. Priestesses of this religion often wear long, red pleated skirts with a white jacket. Shrines of this religion contain a vermillion-colored gate called a torii. For 10 points, name this religion which worships Kami, a native religion of Japan.", "Shinto", "H"]
["In 2009, allegations surfaced that some books published by this group were plagiarized from works of fiction by Jean Sendy. This group, originally known as MADECH, underwent an early purge of key officials who had developed a tendency for occultism. This group advocates a Geniocracy, or regional governance by intelligent people, and claims to operate from a point of view of physicalism, disregarding the supernatural. One organization associated with this group is run by Brigitte Boisselier and is known as Clonaid. Founded by a former race-care driver, this group welcomes and contacts a race of midget-sized extraterrestrials known as the Elohim. FTP, name this religious group founded by the Frenchman Claude Vorilhon and fixated on cloning and aliens.", "Ra\u00eblism", "H"]
["This man once repeatedly ordered his followers to rebuild a wall he had knocked down, then told them off for blindly following orders. He once chastised a man for riding around on a flying carpet by hiding himself in plain sight and comparing the man to the insects, and in another story he deflected the black magic of the women of Kamrup. This man was often accompanied by his friends Bala and Mardana. As a child, a cobra once shielded this man from the sun. The Janamsakhis are biographical records of this figure, who was succeeded by his friend Angad. This man outlined the three pillars of sharing, earnest earning, and chanting Gods name, or Vand Chakko, Kirat Karo and Naam Japna, which were recorded in the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this religious leader who proclaimed \"There is no Hindu, there is no Muslim\", the first guru of Sikhism.", "Guru Nanak", "H"]
["Accepted at the 4th council of Constantinople, the Formula of Hormisdus was one of the earlier proponents of this principle which was notably opposed by Iganz von Dollinger. Intent to bind is one of the conditions for this principle to hold and was reaffirmed in the document Lumen Gentium. Proclamations invoking this principle are always ended with an anathema, recalling St. Augustine's statement that \"Rome has spoken, the case is closed.\" Munificentissimus Deus, issued by Pius XII invoked this in order to declare the Assumption of Mary. FTP, Name this Catholic Church Dogma which states that when its leader speaks ex cathedra on matters of faith and morals, his teachings are always right.", "Papal infallibility", "H"]
["An early theological addition to the practice of this faith was the so-called \"Black Rubric,\" and in 1931, leaders of this faith hashed out an agreement with the Union of Utrecht at the Bonn Conference. The question of what clothes are to be worn by officials within this faith gave rise to its Admonitions controversy. Richard Hooker penned a notable apologetics for this faith, which briefly saw its primary devotional text banned and replaced by a Directory for the Public Worship of God. The central document of this denomination was attacked by the Tractarians, some of whom, like John Henry Newman, eventually left this faith for Catholicism. Relying on the Book of Common Prayer for its worship, for 10 points, identify this Christian denomination that derives its spiritual authority from the Thirty-Nine Articles, the official Christian faith of a certain European island nation.", "Anglicanism", "H"]
["One scripture of this religion states that 85% of the population is deaf, dumb, and easily led by the top 10%, and teaches that the earth once had a single land mass called \"Asia\". Temple #2, located in Chicago, is the headquarters of this religious movement, one of whose leaders wrote the guide How to Eat to Live. Wallace and Lomax produced a documentary on this religion, titled The Hate that Hate Produced, in which the founder of this religion \"charge[s] the white man with being the greatest liar on earth.\" Because of a verse from the Book of Ezekiel, this religion teaches that the original scientists on the island of Nippon built a Mother Plane. Wallace D. Fard was the founder of this religion, whose newspaper, The Final Call, was created by its current leader, Louis Farrakhan. For 10 points, name this largely African-American religion, once led by Elijah Muhammad.", "Nation of Islam", "H"]
["One of these figures was given a pair of divine earrings by Arnahak, and there is a dispute whether that figure was a woman. The mother of another one of these figures suddenly felt compelled to drink the moonlight on a clear night, leading to him being born glowing. Another of these figures was born after his mother had either 14 or 16 auspicious dreams. The first of these figures lives for about six hundred thousand quintillion years, while a later person to hold this position promulgated the five great vows, including truthfulness and nonviolence. For 10 points, name this position held by such figures as Lord Rishabha and Mahavira, the ford-makers and leading venerated figures of Jainism.", "Tirthankara", "H"]
["Slightly after this event, one figure stated that \"Thou shall dash the pieces of the pillars\" and \"Ye shall slice down their Asherim\". One individual who recounted this event stated that \"the pavement of sapphires below them felt like the heaven of clearness\". At the conclusion of this event, the main figure covered his face in a veil in shame, and then proceeded to take off the veil when beams of light shined upon his face. One celebration recounting this event involves the reading of the Akdamut Milin, and that celebration also involves the repeating of the word \"Chalav\". During this event the main figure also was informed of the 613 Mitzvot, and that figure then proceeded to ask for forgiveness of his brother's building of the Golden Calf. For 10 points identify this event from the Book of Exodus that is celebrated through the Jewish holiday of Shavout, and recalls the main figure ascending Mount Sinai.", "Ten Commandments in Catholic theology", "H"]
["One of this religion's saints was rewarded for service at the Battle of Haldighati with a marble tomb that became the center of Fatehpur Sikri; that mentor of Akbar, Salim, was a member of this faith's Chishti Order founded by Abu Shami. Early Western scholarship on this faith was popularized by Ivan Agueli and Rene Guinon, and its major schools include the Naqshbandi and Mevlevi. This faith's sama ceremony is often derided as bidah for institutionalizing the group practice of dhikr, the recitation of the names of God. Achieving the ultimate divine unity embodied by tawhid is the goal of this faith's most famous practice, which was popularized by poets like Rumi. For 10 points, identify this sect of mystical Islam whose followers are often known as \"Dervishes\" for their whirling.", "Sufism", "H"]
["Strict adherents of this faith are allowed to eat but not to pick melons. In this faith, the union of Naimrael and Ashaklun created Adam and Eve, who is eternally punished. The founder of this religion was ordered to proclaim it at age 24 by the spirit Al-Tawm. Intelligence and reason are among this religion's \"five limbs.\" Members of this faith who followed its doctrines less strictly are called Hearers. It taught a severe asceticism, which included total abstinence from sex, even in marriage, and frequent fasting. This faith, which influenced the Paulicians and Cathars, holds that light was imprisoned inside Adam, and its founder is known as the Apostle of Light. This religion was denounced as a Christian heresy by its former adherent, St. Augustine. For 10 points, name this syncretic religion with an emphasis on the dualism between forces of light and the darkness of the world.", "Manichaeism", "H"]
["This man was the first Master Mahan according to the Pearl of Great Price, in which he takes that title after entering a covenant with Satan. In the Qur'an, a raven is sent to help teach this man by Allah, as told in the fifth Sura, \"The Table.\" Heber, Jael's husband in the Book of Judges, belongs to a tribe whose name means \"sons of [this man]\", who preacher William Branham alleged to have an inhuman father with his two-seedline theory. Methusael's son Lamech is a sixth-generation descendant of this man who, if any harm comes to him, is avenged seventy-sevenfold. After this man's most notable action, Seth was born and this man exiled himself to the land of Nod. That act by this farmer was a reaction to a well-received sheep sacrifice, and led God to \"mark\" him. For 10 points, name this early Biblical man, a son of Adam who asked \"Am I my brother's keeper?\" after killing Abel.", "Cain and Abel", "H"]
["The Krenzl is sometimes sung during these events. They occur in two stages, the Erusin and the Nissuin, which finalizes the proceedings. In some traditions, ten to twenty minutes are spent immediately after these events in a (*) private room breaking Yichud. The Mohar is traditionally paid during the first part of these events. They can only occur after the signing of a document, the Ketubah, whose role was initially legal but now purely ceremonial. Though not conversion, prior to these events, one participant must be ritually cleansed in a bath, the mikvah. One participant ceremonially breaks a glass during these events in order to calm the excitement. For 10 points, name these events whose final stage occurs under the chuppah, a distinctive canopy.", "P'tcha", "H"]
["The Krenzl is sometimes sung during these events. They occur in two stages, the Erusin and the Nissuin, which finalizes the proceedings. In some traditions, ten to twenty minutes are spent immediately after these events in a (*) private room breaking Yichud. The Mohar is traditionally paid during the first part of these events. They can only occur after the signing of a document, the Ketubah, whose role was initially legal but now purely ceremonial. Though not conversion, prior to these events, one participant must be ritually cleansed in a bath, the mikvah. One participant ceremonially breaks a glass during these events in order to calm the excitement. For 10 points, name these events whose final stage occurs under the chuppah, a distinctive canopy.", "P'tcha", "H"]
["One section of this texts warns against a \"great and abominable church\" that will fall at the end of days. In another part of this work, one figure breaks a steel bow and replaces it with a wooden one before hunting, and that character eventually arrives at Nahom. Some speculate that this work was partially plagiarized from Ethan Smith's View of the Hebrews, and the Three Witnesses and Eight Witnesses are associated with this text in which figures use a (*) \"ball of curious workmanship\" as a guide. This work contains a race of people called the Lamanites, and the Tree of Life vision can be found in this work's First Book of Nephi. This work was written in \"Reformed Egyptian\" and buried under the hill Cumorah, where it was found and translated in 1827 with the help of the angel Moroni. For 10 points, identify this chief text of the Latter Day Saint movement originally written on golden plates.", "Book of Mormon", "H"]
["This book's sixth chapter contains a much debated section in which the author claims it is impossible for the once enlightened to be brought back if they fall away. It uses a famous athletic analogy in urging readers to \"run with perseverance the race marked out for us\" and to \"fix our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith.\" This book's eleventh chapter begins with the note that \"faith is being sure of what we hope for and certain of what we do not see\" and presents a \"Faith Hall (*) of Fame\" of people like Noah. In its seventh chapter, it uses the figure of \"Melchizedek\" as an example of someone who is both priest and king. This book's first chapters stress Jesus' superiority to the angels, the high priests, and prophets like Moses. Unlike the other epistles, its author does not identify himself. For 10 points, name this New Testament epistle directed to the title audience of Jewish Christians.", "Epistle to the Hebrews", "H"]
["Michael Servetus opposed this idea in two books of dialogues on it. Augustine's work titled after this idea uses it to draw a distinction between religion of revelation and natural religion. The term perichoresis describes the mutual indwelling of the subjects of this doctrine. This doctrine states that multiple (*) hypostases exist in one ousia, and it is affirmed by the Athanasian creed. It was opposed by one figure who stated one of its subjects was inferior to another because it is non-eternal; that figure is Arius, the namesake of Arianism. The Fourth Lateran Council states that one subject of this doctrine generates, another proceeds, and another is begotten. For 10 points, name this Christian doctrine which states that God comes in the form of the father, the son, and the holy ghost.", "Trinity", "H"]
["The initiation ceremony for this religion includes such steps as the crushing of leaves during the bat ge, creating packets filled with soil, and feeding sacred food to Ayizan. Sacred rattles called assons are used by priests of this religion and each individual in this religion has a protector called a Met Tet. Deities in this tradition are represented by veve symbols, and one of those figures is depicted smoking a pipe and wearing a (*) straw hat. Another of those figures in this religion is represented wearing a top hat and a black tuxedo. Sorcerers are called bokor in this religion and are distinguished from priests called houngans or mambos. Papa Legba and Baron Samedi are examples of loas, which are worshipped in this religion. For 10 points, name this religious movement of West Africa and Haiti whose named is associated with an evil type of doll?", "Voodoo", "H"]
["This figure and a companion were once imprisoned as spies in Kuiya, but were released by the intervention of two sisters. This figure would often remain in kayostarga while Gosala would misbehave toward others. This figure once wandered peacefully after an angry cowherd shoved grass sticks into his ear at Chammani. An elephant and a smokeless fire were seen in the first and last of fourteen prophetic (*) dreams which occurred to Trishala before this figure's birth, although he was conceived in Devananda's womb. This figure had eleven disciples, nine of which achieved kevala in his lifetime, and he believed in a life force called jiva. This man succeeded Lord Parshva and while fasting under an ashoka tree, he tore out his hair and took off his clothes before preaching extreme asceticism until his death. For 10 points, name this 24th Tirthankara and the founder of Jainism.", "Mahavira", "H"]
["In one ritual from this religion, someone is offered a crown at sword-point, but must refuse the crown. \"Corax\" and \"Nymphus\" are the first two levels of seven for this religion's followers. One figure from this religion is often depicted aiming a bow at a rock, which will gush forth water when struck. Iconography in this tradition includes the deities Cautes and Cautopates holding torches in different directions and a figure with a lion head surrounded by a snake called Arimanius. Depictions of banquets featuring the god (*) Sol and figures wearing Phrygian caps are central to this religion. Shrines in this religion were often found in caves, and the central depiction for this religion was the tauroctony, or the bull-sacrifice. For 10 points, name this mystery religion popular among soldiers in the Roman empire which worshipped an older Persian deity.", "Mithraism", "H"]
["Jeroboam created a perverted version of this holiday in the northern Kingdom. Chapter three of the Mishna states that one fruit used in this holiday is not kosher if it is completely round or if it is missing its nipple. During this holiday, the Seven Shepherds are celebrated in the ushpizin prayer. This holiday contains the last of the Days of Judgement. Once every seven years, the king reads the Torah during this festival in a tradition known as (*) Hakhel. On the last day of this holiday, Hoshanah Rabbah, Jews beat the ground with the Aravah, Hadass, Lulav, and Etrog, which make up the Four Species and the leaves of which are used to build this holiday's namesake structures. For 10 points, name this holiday in which Jews recall travelling through the desert by living in temporary huts.", "Sukkot", "H"]
["King Robert II of France was the author of the sequence used in the mass for this holiday. After the 1094 Council of Constance, the courts re-convened only three days after this holiday. In the Eastern Church, fasting is not permitted in the week after this holiday, which is the second greatest of the Great Feasts. It grew out of the Jewish holiday that was also called the (*) Feast of Weeks or Shavuot. In the Liturgy of the hours on this day, the hymn at Terce is replaced by \"Veni Creator.\" The participants in the first occurrence of this holiday were said by some onlookers to have had \"too much wine\" as they were preaching in tongues. The vestments used in the mass for this holiday give the Italian name for this holiday, Pascha Rossa. For 10 points, name this holiday which commemorates the Holy Spirit descending on the Apostles in the form of tongues of flame 50 days after Easter.", "Pentecost", "H"]
["One object that is used for this practice must be stored away after this practice is completed in order to prevent the devil from also participating, and it can be done optionally as Nafl. This practice can be preceded by the khutbah, a special sermon, and this practice utilizes the musallah. This practice includes many invocations of the (*) takbir, and it has one version called jumu'ah, which is done in a group and replaces zuhr on fridays. The requirement to perform this practice was reduced in magnitude during Isra and Mi'raj. This practice is made up of parts called rakah, and it is preceded by ghusl or wudu, which are types of ablution. This practice is announced by the muezzin, and it is always done facing the qibla, which is the direction of the Kaaba. For 10 points, this type of prayer that is required to be done five times a day as one of the pillars of Islam.", "Salah", "H"]
["Oracles undertake this action in order to advise Azande provincial leaders during the rainy season on whether to attack neighboring sentries. In another tradition, this action is done to remove and collect sins of men, and that instance of this action may have become a tradition because of the two meanings of the word \"gever.\" In that tradition, passages from Isaiah, Psalms, and Job are read before the object of this practice is (*) swung around the performer's head three times; that practice, which is called Kapparot, is performed on the day before Yom Kippur. A necklace called the eleke is stored in a special fluid for seven days before this action is performed in order to gain the protection of the Orishas in another religion. For 10 points, name this type of religious offering that is controversially performed by practitioners of Santeria.", "chicken sacrifice ", "H"]
["When describing the solitary habits of this figure, it was noted that he \"came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, 'He has a demon'\". He appeared to Oliver Cowdery to induct him into the Aaronic priesthood, and his feast day is Quebec's national holiday. He called a crowd, \"offspring of vipers\" and ordered them to repent. This man once appeared to Gabriel appeared to this figure's father while burning incense and told him of this man's birth, which was identified with (*) Elijah, and this figure's mother Elizabeth was related to Mary. This man disapproved the new marriage of Herodias and met his end when a drunk Herod was so impressed by a dance that he granted his daughter Salome's wish of this man's head on a platter. For 10 points, name this preacher who prepared the people for the coming of Christ, and who baptized him in the Jordan River.", "John the Baptist", "H"]
["When Shaitan attempted to stop this event, its instigator threw stones at him, which is the inspiration for the ritual of the Stoning of the Devil. Maimonides argued that this event established the truth of prophecy as equal footing with philosophical arguments. This event, which is celebrated on a holiday that coincides with the end of the hajj, occurred on Mount (*) Moirah. This event, which is the subject of Eid al-Adha, is cited as a \"teleological suspension of the ethical\" in one work. A ram caught in a thicket was the ultimate victim of this event, whose original target was placed on a wooden altar and almost stabbed before an angel appeared to the instigator. For 10 points, name this event narrated in Genesis, in which a Biblical schizophrenic almost killed his son at God's request.", "Sacrifice of Isaac (Caravaggio)", "H"]
["At one point, members of this group were prevented from playing chess because of lingering tensions after matches. This movement prefers to use the word \"torture stake\" instead of \"cross\" because they believe that Jesus was crucified on an upright pole with a nail through both hands. Punishment among this group is carried out by a form of shunning called (*) \"disfellowshipping,\" and one earlier leader of this group was Joseph F. Rutherford. Members of this movement hold that only 144,000 people will be let into heaven, and they abstain from military service, blood transfusions, and birthday celebrations. Members of this group can serve as \"pioneers\" and their houses of worship are called \"Kingdom Halls.\" The Watchtower is the central publication of, for 10 points, which religious movement founded by Charles Taze Russell consisting of many namesake door-to-door preachers?", "Jehovah's Witnesses", "H"]
["The life of this movement's founder is described in the Cologne Codex, which mentions that its first followers were Simeon, Zako, and his father Pattik. Members of this group were divided into classes called \"Perfect\" and \"Hearers,\" and the duties of this group's members were represented by three signacula, or seals. The Feast of Bema was celebrated yearly on the anniversary of this group's founder, and texts important to this group included the Arzhang and the (*) Book of Giants. This movement's founder was visited by a \"divine twin\" and theorized a \"World of Light\" ruled by a \"Father of Majesty,\" and followed by three creations. Saint Augustine was an adherent to this religious movement before converting to Christianity. For 10 points, identify this early dualistic religion founded by a namesake Persian prophet in the 3rd century A.D.", "Manichaeism", "M"]
["This figure told crowds to give charity after calling them a \"brood of vipers\" and exhorting them not to rely on the covenant with Abraham. The Baha'i faith holds that the Bab is the return of Elijah and this figure. Upon writing this figure's name, the ability to speak, which had been taken away by Gabriel, returned to this figure's father Zechariah. Herod ordered this man's execution after a certain dancer asked for his head on a plate. He said \"I am the voice of one calling in the desert, 'Make straight the way for the Lord,'\" and is viewed as a forerunner of Jesus. For 10 points, name this figure who baptized Jesus Christ.", "John the Baptist", "M"]
["Near the end of this observance, sad songs are sung at Se'uda Shlishit, the third meal. On this holiday, the angels of peace are invited into the home by singing \"Shalom Aleichem,\" and another song sung on this day during a service called its \"Kabbalat\" refers to this holiday as a \"bride.\" That song is \"L'chah Dodi,\" which mentions that the Bible says to \"remember\" and \"keep\" this day. It is also welcomed by lighting two candles, drinking wine, and eating two loaves of Challah bread. For 10 points, name this Jewish day of rest, occurring from Friday night until Saturday night every week.", "Shabbat", "M"]
["This religion's followers make pilgrimage to the Palitana temples, and its principle of nirjara, one of its nine tattva, ends the process of samvara. That process is described in the Tattvartha Sutra, one of the few texts followed by both its \"white-clad\" and \"sky-clad\" sects. Its Great Vows include one which leads some to sweep their path to avoid killing insects; that principle is ahimsa, or non-violence. Its adherents believe in the liberation of jiva by the shedding of karmas to achieve moksha, a nirvana-like state. For 10 points, name this pacifistic religion established by Mahavira with strict dietary requirements.", "Jainism", "M"]
["The Pali Canon refers to the Buddha as the \"kaya\" or the body of this concept. The acara is believed by Hindus to be one source of this concept, along with smrti (\"smer-tee\") and sruti. In Chinese, this concept is the \"fa\" in the Falun Gong. In Buddhism, the first arhat, Kondanna, was the first to understand the Four Noble Truths in the sutra titled \"Setting in Motion the Wheel of\" this concept. This concept is a purusartha along with artha, kama, and moksha, and it provides the basis for the Hindu caste system. Often used to describe all Indian religions, for 10 points, name this word that means law or righteousness.", "Dharma", "M"]
["The Brahma's Net Sutra describes one of these figures, who represents the concept of sunyata. As an incarnation of the Maitreya, Budai is nicknamed the \"Laughing\" one. The Vairocana is the central one of five \"wisdom\" ones of these figures worshipped in Shingon, while the one of \"infinite light\" is called the Amitabha. Many statues of these figures are housed in the Longmen Grottoes, and two in Afghanistan were destroyed by the Taliban. For 10 points, give this word usually referring to Siddhartha Gautama that means \"enlightened one.\"", "Gautama Buddha", "M"]
["The phrase \"talitha qum\" is attributed to this figure, who said it to the daughter of Jairus. He predicts that an event will occur before a rooster crows the next morning. He grew up in the house of a tekton, and he was the speaker of the Olivet prophecy. The Qur'an mentions this figure by name twenty-five times more than Muhammad, with his name transliterated as \"Isa,\" and he is considered a Manifestation of God in the Baha'i faith. He was tried and beaten by the Sanhedrin, and later crucified by the decree of Pontius Pilate. For 10 points, name this central figure of Christianity, considered to be the messiah.", "Jesus", "M"]
["The first biography of this figure was written by Maximus the Confessor. After a two-week fast, an Orthodox feast celebrates the dormition of this figure, who also spoke the words of a text often sung in the Liturgy of the Hours and at Vespers. That text contains the line \"my soul doth magnify the lord\" and is called the Magnificat. Pope Pius IX in the encyclical Ineffabilis Deus codified the belief that this figure was \"free from all stain.\" Along with the use of the word \"theotokos\" and belief in the Assumption, the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception concerns this figure. For 10 points, name this woman, the mother of Jesus Christ.", "Mary, mother of Jesus", "M"]
["Instead of partaking in the central practice of this observance, the sick and elderly must donate food to the poor. Observers must begin their days with the oath, or niyyah, otherwise their actions are seen as invalid. During this religious period, the point when the angel Gabriel began to recite scripture is marked by the Night of Power. It involves practicing sawm before the consumption of dates begins iftar, the evening meal. A group prayer is performed after the new moon is sighted, marking the end of this period on Eid al-Fitr. For 10 points, name this ninth Islamic month which involves daily fasting.", "Ramadan", "M"]
["One symbol in this religion is the veve, which is drawn on the floor using ashes and cornmeal. One figure in this religion, Nibo, serves as a psychopomp along with other members of the Guede family. Ayizan and Loco are the first members of this religion's priesthood, including houngans and mambos. Rituals in this religion seek to reach the creator god Bondye's intermediaries, and always invoke Papa Legba. Maman Brigitte and her husband, the tuxedo-clad Baron Samedi, are two of the loas of this religion. For 10 points, name this Catholic-influenced religion that is practiced in West Africa and Haiti.", "Voodoo", "M"]
["One of this religion's deities is part of a triad including the water god Apam Napat. That deity created Asha Vahishta, Haurvatat, and four other \"divine sparks\" or Amesha Spenta, who are opposed by the daevas. Those who successfully cross the Chinvat Bridge are united with this religion's deity of good, and the Vendidad is a collection of discussions between him and a certain prophet. That text is part of the Avesta. This religion contrasts the evil deity Angra Mainyu with the good deity Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this dualistic religion that was founded by a Persian prophet.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["The Baha'ullah compared himself to this man after the death of Mirza Mehdi. This figure was rewarded by Melchizedek after he rallied 318 men to defeat and kill Chederlaomer. In Islamic tradition, after receiving the Black Stone, this man constructed the Kaaba. This man pleaded for God to seek ten righteous men before destroying Sodom and Gomorrah. With his wife's handmaiden Hagar, he fathered Ishmael, and on Mount Moriah he was stopped by an angel from sacrificing his son Isaac. For 10 points, name this \"father of many nations\" who lends his name to a group of religions including Christianity and Judaism.", "Abraham", "H"]
["One section of this book states that the greatest leaders are those that the people do not realize are there, causing everyone to say that \"we did this ourselves.\" It says that \"Putting a large nation in order is like grilling a small fish.\" It claims that the \"source of the cosmos\" is the gate of the \"Mysterious Female.\" Its 81 (*) chapters have been translated into English by Stephen Mitchell. Its first chapter's second line says \"The name that can be defined is not the unchanging name,\" in a parallel structure to its first line. This book includes the saying that the journey of a thousand li begins with a single step, and it focuses on following the proper \"way\" in life. For 10 points, name this book written by Lao Tzu, the central text of Daoism.", "Tao Te Ching", "H"]
["During this period, the Te Deum is omitted from the Liturgy of the Hours, and deacons wear folded chasubles instead of dalmatics. Vestments used during this period are often Sarum blue, and it begins on Levavi. In the Anglican church, the Sunday before this period is colloquially known as Stir-up Sunday. In Methodism, it is preceded by a period known as (*) Kingdomtide, although it is preceded by the feast of Christ the King in most Christian denominations, making it the beginning of the Liturgical year. This period's name comes from a translation of the Greek word parousia. It features Gaudete Sunday, on which a pink or rose colored candle is lit, in contrast to the purple candles lit on the other three Sundays of this season. For ten points, name this Christian season that takes place in November and December, in preparation for Christmas", "Advent", "H"]
["The name of the Jewish sacrifice korban olah indirectly refers to this substance. Milk is offered to a deity representing this substance a few minutes before sunrise and sunset in one form of yajna, which is a general sacrifice where the intended recipient deity receives the offerings from this substance. In one section of the Pali Canon, the Buddha (*) proclaims that seeing the action of this substance on the senses and mind leads to disenchantment and liberation, and the thousand listening monks are all liberated. A place of worship named after this substance must be built near clean water and often sees a Yasna service where parts of the Avestas are read. This substance names Zoroastrian temples and is represented by Agni in Hinduism. Vestal virgins had to continuously maintain, for 10 points, what sacred substance that burns?", "Fire", "H"]
["Jews in Jerusalem and other walled cities observe this holiday on the day after it is typically celebrated, and across Israel ad-lo-yada celebrations are held. This holiday features namesake masechet and spiels, which are liturgical parodies. Boiled peas and beans are customary features of this holiday's festive meal, and mishloach manot are baskets of food given to the (*) poor on this holiday. A controversial tradition on this holiday is the injunction for adult observers to drink until they cannot keep the hero and villain of its story straight. Another traditional food for this holiday is a folded, filled pastry called a hamantashen. To drown out the \"memory of Amalek,\" children twirl noisemakers called graggers when the name \"Haman\" is uttered. For 10 points, name this \"Feast of Lots\" that sees the reading of the Book of Esther.", "Purim", "H"]
["The final section of this book includes the Aramaic phrase \"anathema marana tha.\" This book's first section quotes Isaiah 29 and says that \"God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise.\" This book says that the \"last Adam\" will be a \"life-giving spirit.\" This book's 11th chapter states that while praying, women must have their head (*) covered. One section of this book states that \"When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child\" and later goes on to state that \"For now we see through a glass, darkly.\" This book ends a discussion on the qualities that define love with the lines \"And now these three remain: faith, hope, and love. But the greatest of these is love.\" For 10 points, name this Pauline epistle addressed to a Greek city.", "First Epistle to the Corinthians", "H"]
["One sacrament in this religion is a naming ceremony which takes place on the twelfth day after birth, and adherents of this religion also celebrate a baby's first intake of food other than milk. In one ritual performed by practitioners of this religion, a flower represents solidarity, water represents liquidity, and a peacock fan represents movement. That ritual occurs eight times a day in temples and features five (*) oil lamps made from a special type of butter rotated around a central figure. In this religion, people who have renounced worldly pursuits, called sannyasins, are not required to be cremated, although as in similar religions, cremation is generally mandated. Practitioners of this religion worship divine images called murti in a ceremony called aarti, as part of puja. That ritual often occurs in temples called mandirs. For 10 points, name this Indian religion which worships gods like Shiva.", "Hinduism", "H"]
["One hymn sung during this event begins with the lines \"Rejoice, heavenly powers! Sing, choirs of angels! Exalt, all creation around the throne!\" At the beginning of this event, Catholics light a large candle that has the letters alpha and omega inscribed on it. That candle is used in a procession, which is then followed by the singing of a hymn called the (*) exsultet. This event was originally the only time during which baptism could be performed. Now it is a common time for confirmation and ends with the Eucharist. This event, which sees the lighting of the Paschal candle, is the first time \"Hallelujah\" is used after the beginning of Lent and it begins on Holy Saturday. For 10 points, name this service held before a holiday that is often celebrated by decorating eggs.", "Easter Vigil", "H"]
["This figure \"came with springing tears to the spring of mercy\" according to a prayer by St. Anselm. In one story, this person presented an egg to Tiberius, which turned red after he denied Christ's divinity. An apocryphal gospel generally attributed to this person describes a vision about the ascent of a soul, which encounters four powers that try to stop its ascent. This person became a believer in Jesus after being (*) cleansed of seven demons, and, according to three of the gospels, this person was the first to witness the Resurrection. It was a proclamation by Pope Gregory I that led to this figure's conflation with several similarly named persons and with the \"Sinful Woman,\" which may have in turn led to her being labeled as a prostitute. For 10 points, name this female follower of Jesus, sometimes said to have been the lover of", "Mary Magdalene", "H"]
["Margaret Hasluck commented on the prevalence of this holiday being used as a last name for children born during it, and one scholar with this name wrote What I Believe and The Quest for Meaning. The practices of this holiday were syncretized with the Sabian customs of worshipping the disappearance and then reappearance of the Moon. According to one source, on this holiday \"the Gates of Heaven are thrown open and the Gates of Hell are shut.\" This holiday includes the eating of a (*) meal that begins with the consumption of dates, and it includes the Night of Power or Laylat al-Qadr, which is held on an odd-numbered day. With a name derived from a word representing the scorching heat of the ground, it includes the reading of special prayers called Tarawih and it culminates in the Eid-ul-Fitr. For 10 points, name this holiday known for its daytime fasting, the ninth month of the Islamic calendar.", "Ramadan", "H"]
["In one festival marking the beginning of this period, participants throw roasted soybeans out a door or at an actor wearing an Oni mask. In another festival marking the beginning of this period, female participants line a basket with satin or lace and place a corn dolly to represent the Goddess Brighid's marriage bed. In addition to (*) Setsubun and Imbolc, another holiday celebrating the beginning of this period occurs on the full moon during Phalguna and is associated with Radha and Krishna's love. The throwing of colors is another part of Holi, which celebrates the start of this season. During this season, Palm Sunday precedes a holiday that commemorates the crucifixion of Jesus. For 10 points, name this season during which Easter traditionally occurs.", "Spring", "H"]
["In one text, a person is the direct cause of achieving this concept just like milk is the direct cause of cream, implying that all sentient beings can achieve this concept. In that same text, this concept is the perfection of the four qualities of being truly permanent, truly blissful, truly self, and truly pure. A response of \"no\" is given to the question if a (*) dog has the nature needed to achieve this concept in the first case of the Gateless Gate. Nam-Myoho-Renge-Kyo is chanted by followers of Nichiren to achieve this concept. The liberation of all people by helping them awaken their inner this nature is the goal of the bodhisattva. The Nirvana Sutra focuses on, for 10 points, what concept also known as perfect enlightenment that was famously achieved after sitting under a bodhi tree by Shakyamuni?", "Buddhahood", "H"]
["At the insistence of the Lord, this man was given the appellation Jedidiah after his birth. He was the second child born to his parents, the first having died as an infant per the words of Nathan the prophet. The only wife of this man named in the Hebrew Bible as having borne him a child was Naamah the Ammonite. This man granted clemency to his half-brother Adonijah, but he sent Benaiah to kill (*) Joab. Benaiah was also one of this man's companions when he rode upon a mule to the spring of Gihon to be anointed by Zadok the priest. To execute a building project that his father never realized, this man imported cedars from Lebanon. In another story, two prostitutes came before this man and both claimed to be the mother of a child, so this man ordered the child to be cut in half. For 10 points, name this son and successor of King David who built a namesake temple.", "Solomon", "H"]
["One of these beings has a mouth of a pig and a complexion of gold, though more often these beings have huge abdomens and may have a throat the size of a needle of tied in a knot. In the desire realm, being one of them is part of the second of the three lower domains. The Ullambana Sutra instructs one how to relieve the sufferings of these beings, which led to the development of the (*) Zhongyuan festival, where joss paper is burnt. In addition to the \"hungry\" form of these beings found in Buddhism, Samuel is summoned as one of these beings by the Witch of Endor at the request of Saul. After the resurrection, Jesus has to convince his disciples he is not one of these beings. For 10 points, name these beings that are the manifestations of a dead person.", "Ghost", "M"]
["This religion's founder received a vision of Vohu Manah while gathering water in the Daiti River. Practitioners of it differentiate between asha and druj, which stand for truth and chaos. Followers of this religion believe that virtue is rewarded in the House of Songs, which lies across the bridge (*) Chinvat. Instruction on how to repel demons called Daevas is given in the Vendidad, which, along with the Gathas, make up its scripture. This religion follows its holy text of the Avesta, and its deities include Angra Mainyu and Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, identify this religion based on the teachings of its namesake Persian prophet, sometimes called Zarathustra.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["The Book of Numbers is used as a guide for the teki'ah and shevarim, two actions associated with a ceremony often performed on this holiday. Piyuttim poems are added to services during this holiday. This day honors God's opening of the Sefer Hachaim, and the ceremony of (*) tashlikh during it symbolizes the casting away of one's sins as one throws pebbles into a river. It begins the ten days of the Yamim Nora'im, which is often preceded by a period in which the selichot prayers are recited. It falls on the first day of Tishrei, occurring nine days before Yom Kippur. If it does not fall on the Shabbat, then the shofar is blown during this holiday. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday commemorating the New Year.", "Rosh Hashanah", "M"]
["A tract called \"The Unfettered Mind\" attempted to integrate this religion's teachings with sword fighting. Adherents of it eat according to oryoki, part of the period of meditation known as sesshin. Several of its holy texts were compiled during the Song dynasty; these include the (*) Blue Cliff Record and the Gateless Gate. It includes the Rinzai and Soto sects, and traces its origins to an incident in which prajna was transferred onto Mahaksyapa, the Flower Sermon. Followers of this religion contemplate questions called koans, such as \"What is the sound of one hand clapping?\" For 10 points, name this sect of Buddhism popular in Japan.", "Zen", "M"]
["A work sometimes attached to this book states that \"My hands made a harp/my fingers fashioned a lyre\". This book is alluded to in Second Samuel 22 and part of the authorship of this book is made clear by Acts 4:25. Several parts of this book are associated with Asaph, while other sections are connected with the choir of Jeduthun. One speaker in this book describes his desire to (*) \"dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life\", and a more famous section states that \"thy rod and thy staff comfort me\" after beginning \"The Lord is my shepherd\". The majority of this book is attributed to David. For 10 points, name this longest book of the Bible, a set of 150 poems praising God.", "Psalms", "M"]
["Seventh-Day Adventists draw on First Corinthians to justify non-exclusiveness during this ceremony, which is celebrated once per quarter and involves a footwashing. Thomas Aquinas found parallels between this ritual and an action of Melchizedek in Genesis 14. A prayer named for this ceremony has two versions in Orthodox Christianity named for John Chrysostoam and Basil, and is called the (*) anaphora. Catholics generally first undergo this ritual at around the age of seven, and believe that transubstantiation is intertwined with this rite, in which the priest states \"This is my body.\" For 10 points, name this Christian sacrament reflecting the Last Supper , in which bread and wine are consumed.", "Eucharist", "E"]
["People who experienced this event were sometimes allowed to reach the Sekhet Aaru [sehkeht ah-roo], or \"field of reeds.\" During this event, the \"opening of the mouth\" symbolically allowed a person to eat and see. In this ritual, organs became protected by (*) canopic jars before the dried corpse was wrapped in linen according to rituals in the Book of the Dead. For 10 points, name this process that preserved and prepared dead Egyptians for the afterlife.", "Buddhist mummies", "E"]
[". A collection of some of these works, recited on holidays, is called Hallel, and its fifty-first section is known as the \"Miserere\" [mee-seh-reh-ray]. One passage of this book laments \"I have so many enemies\" as its author flees his son (*) Absalom. Another portion reads, \"Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good.\" For 10 points, name this Biblical book, written primarily by David, whose twenty-third section begins, \"The Lord is my shepherd.\"", "Psalms", "E"]
["Mandaeans frequently perform this action, which Peter likened to an Old Testament disaster survived by eight people. The son of Elizabeth saw the Holy Spirit visibly descend on (*) Jesus during this ritual. A Protestant sect named for this ritual restricts participants to adults and performs this rite by immersion since John performed this ritual in the water of the Jordan. For 10 points, name this Christian sacrament in which a person is doused with holy water.", "Baptism", "E"]
["One sect of this religion emphasizes focus on questions recorded in the Blue Cliff Record, known as koans. Another sect focuses on attaining the \"pure land\" in the afterlife, and is part of the \"greater vehicle\" division of this religion. The (*) Four Noble Truths are sacred to this religion, whose founder notably sat under a bodhi tree. For 10 points, Mahayana and Theravada are two primary division of this Indian religion founded by Gautama.", "Buddhism", "E"]
["Muhammad described this man as being \"60 cubits tall,\" and Shaitan [shah-ee-tahn] was cast out of heaven for refusing to acknowledge this man's superiority to angels. In Jewish tradition, this man's first wife left him for Samael [sah-mah-ehl]. This husband of (*) Lilith was condemned to live \"by the sweat of [his] brow,\" and he became the father of Seth after the death of this man's son, Abel. For 10 points, name this husband of Eve, the first human man created by God.", "Adam", "E"]
["One part of this event commemorates a journey between Safa and Marwa. A shortened version of this event is called the Umra, which ends with participants cutting their hair. This rite requires believers to wear ihram as they walk around the (*) Ka'aba [kha-ah-bah] and celebrate Allah saving Hajar and Isma'il [ees-mah-eel] by drinking water from the Zamzam Well. For 10 points, name this Pillar of Islam, in which adherents take a holy pilgrimage to Mecca.", "Hajj", "E"]
["One of these stories concerns a wedding feast that the guests refuse to attend, and in another, some \"evil\" farmers conspire to murder their landlord\u201fs son. In one tale of this type, a young man wastes his inheritance, but is happily (*) welcomed back to his father's home, and in another, a priest and a Levite ignore a wounded man, who is saved by a \"Good Samaritan.\" For 10 points, the \"Prodigal Son\" is one of these allegorical stories told by Jesus.", "Parables of Jesus", "E"]
["This figure's actions led to the killing of 800 men in Susa over two days, and a festival commemorating this successor to Queen Vashti features the reading of this figure's Megillah, which describes her triumph over Haman. She used her influence over (*) Xerxes to save the Jews, leading to a celebration named for the casting of lots. For 10 points, the triumph of Mordecai and what Jewish queen is celebrated with Purim?", "Esther", "E"]
["The ninety-sixth section of this work invokes the reader to \"recite\" in the name of the lord \"who created man from a mere clot of blood.\" Mukham [moo-khahm] and mutashabeh [mootah-shah-beh] are classifications of (*) ayat that appear in this work, which includes basmalah in all but its ninth chapter. Those chapters are called sura, and were first delivered on Mount Hira by Jibreel. For 10 points, name this Islamic religious text that was revealed to the Prophet Muhammad.", "Quran", "M"]
["Some of this religion's practitioners buried flowers and some cremated them after the death of this religion's founder, who had earlier been accosted for sleeping with his feet towards the Ka'ba. That founder also uttered the first three shabad of the nighttime hymn sohila. The khalsa is this religion's community, and each member is required to carry a Kirpan and is forbidden from cutting hair, a practice known as kesh. The tenth of this religion's leaders was succeeded upon his death by a work that had been compiled by Arjan Dev. For 10 points, identify this Indian religion founded by Guru Nanak whose adherents practice the 5 K's and whose holy book is the Adi Granth.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["The ritual of bi'ur, or burning, traditionally precedes the distribution of this object, which is the subject of the first of the Four Questions. One specific example of this item is traditionally stolen by children and not returned until the end of the meal; that example is the afikomen. Hillel the Elder mixed it with maror and Paschal lamb, creating an item that makes up a part of the seder meal. Items not made of this foodstuff are chametz and must be thrown away before the start of the holiday. Because Israelites had to leave Egypt before their bread had time to rise, for 10 points, what unleavened bread is annually enjoyed by Jews on Passover?", "Matzo", "M"]
["Saint Augustine used an example of an African congregation yelling every time a pastor read the word ivy in this book to criticize Jerome's translation of a passage where God starts a question with \"You were concerned for the gourd on which you did not labor.\" That plant had been providing shade for the title figure, but was destroyed by a worm. The title figure claims he sank to \"the roots of the mountains\" in the prayer in its second chapter. This book's title figure goes to Joppa to find transportation and had previously been instructed to go to Nineveh, but instead fled on a ship. For 10 points, name this Biblical book about a prophet who is swallowed by a sea monster.", "Book of Jonah", "M"]
["After being chosen by Ashpenaz, this man subsisted on vegetables and water for ten days rather than eat royal food. The Prayer of Azariah is sometimes included in his namesake book, along with the story of Bel and the Dragon, in which Habakkuk shares a meal with this figure. This figure interpreted a dream about a tile-footed statue made of gold, silver, bronze, and iron. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were the names of companions of this figure who were thrown into a fire but remained unburnt. He was also able to read the writing on the wall at Belshazzar's feast. For 10 points, name this prophet who interpreted Nebuchadnezzar's dreams and was thrown into a lions' den.", "Daniel", "M"]
["It isn't Purim, but on this holiday al ha-nissim is added to a prayer. On this holiday, many Hasidim recite Psalm 91 seven times after a certain action. The blessings L'hadlik neir and she-hekhianu are given on this holiday. The songs Hanerot Halalu and Ma'oz Tzur, or \"Rock of Ages,\" are sung on this holiday. \"Gelt\" is a traditional gift of money on this holiday, which begins on the twenty-fifth of Kislev. The letters nun, gimel, hei, and shin are on an object used on this holiday. Celebrating events from the book of Maccabees, it commemorates a day's worth of oil lasting eight. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday during which people spin dreidels and light the Menorah.", "Hanukkah", "M"]
["A sermon delivered by one participant in this event claimed that its participants were not drunk but rather were fulfilling a prophecy from the book of Joel. In the Western liturgical calendar, this event immediately precedes the second period of Ordinary Time and is celebrated using red vestments in the Roman Rite. This event also lends its name to a movement within Charismatic Christianity that is uses glossolalia. This day commemorates the event in chapter two of Acts in which the Holy Spirit descended upon the apostles. For 10 points, name this Christian holiday, sometimes called Whitsun, which is named for coming fifty days after Easter Sunday.", "Pentecost", "M"]
["Adherents of this religion believe in the Law of Three and the Tenant of the Rede, as well as in Akasha, the fifth element. The two primary traditions of this religion are Gardnerian and Alexandrian. This religion's meetings, known as esbat, begin with the fivefold kiss and involve an athame dagger. Its festivals include Beltane and Samhain. Aradia, the daughter of Diana, and Iseult, Eos, Kore, and Brighid are all aspects of this religion's Goddess, who changes from Maiden, to Mother, and to Crone. For 10 points, name this religion that worships the Horned God and the Triple Goddess, which is a neopagan religion symbolized by a pentagram and which meets in covens.", "Wicca", "M"]
["In this work, a king en route to convert the Bilqis encounters a talking ant. Another figure in this work is told to shake a palm tree and eat the dates during childbirth. Another section, which sees Moses resurrect a dead body by slapping it with a cow hide, praises God as \"the most Gracious, the Most Merciful.\" In another episode, the transcriber ascends through seven heavens to speak to God. The \"Throne\" and the \"Sword\" are among its verses, or ayat, and \"The Ant,\" \"Mary,\" \"The Cow,\" and \"The Night Journey\" are among its chapters, or suras. Revealed by Gabriel to Muhammad, for 10 points, name this Islamic holy book.", "Quran", "M"]
["This faith teaches that there are 36 levels of heaven and twice as many inhabited planets, of which Earth is the 68th. Men in this religion enter temples from the right while women enter from the left. Members of this religion pray four times a day starting at 6 A.M. In this faith, God is represented by a divine left eye, usually shown on the side of a sphere, and adherents follow the Three Teachings of the Buddhas, Sages, and the Saints. This faith mimics the structure of the Catholic Church, utilizing cardinals and a pope. This religion's Holy See is at Tay Ninh, and recognizes saints such as Sun Yat-sen and Victor Hugo. For 10 points, name this syncretic Vietnamese religion.", "Cao Dai ", "M"]
["In the eschatology of this religion, Saoshyant brings about the final renovation of the world. In its scripture, Yima repeatedly uses a seal and dagger to make the earth grow. After death, some of its practitioners are placed on a dakhma. The primary text of this religion includes the liturgical Yasna and a section on protecting against Daevas, the Vendidad. This religion's holy book includes the Gathas and is written in a namesake language called Avestan. In this religion, the six Amesha Spentas oppose the evil Ahriman and are the divine sparks of Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, identify this dualistic Iranian religion whose adherents worship in fire temples.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["A debate between this religion's founder and Archelaus is Hegemonius's only surviving work, which is called Acta Archelai. The Red Turban sect was started by members of the White Lotus and this religion. Bahram II killed the apostle Sisin of this religion. Diocletian burnt its followers alive along with their sacred books. Its founder wrote the Shabuhragan, a work dedicated to Shapur, and believed that there was originally a World of Light and a World of Darkness. For 10 points, name this religion that St. Augustine followed for nine years before converting to Christianity, a religion named for a third century Iranian prophet.", "Manichaeism", "M"]
["The Seven Sleepers are described in The Cave, which immediately precedes the sura named for this figure, who also appears in Al Imran, a sura named for this figure's father. The salutations of this figure caused a baby to leap in the womb of the wife of Zacharias. The Assumption celebrates the bodily ascension of this figure, who, in the Eastern church is called theotokos. In Luke 1:26 this figure is visited during the Annunciation by Gabriel, and, according to the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, this daughter of St. Anne was born free of original sin. A prayer to this cousin of Elizabeth calls her \"blessed amongst women.\" For 10 points, name this virgin wife of Joseph.", "Nativity of Mary", "M"]
["In this religion's ceremonies, spirits like the Erzuli \"mount\" their \"horses.\" The kanzo ceremony allows conversion to this religion. Practitioners of this religion believe in the \"ti bon ange,\" or consciousness, and the \"gros bon ange,\" or soul, which inhabits a clay jar called a gobi after death. Spirits in this religion are attracted to intricate floor designs called veves, created by its clergy, the houngans and the mambos. In this religion, the link to the spirit world of Guinee is a crossroads presided over by Papa Legba, who, along with Baron Samedi, is one of the loas under Bondye. For 10 points, name this Caribbean religion that syncretises Catholicism and Yoruban beliefs.", "Voodoo", "M"]
["This figure built the nehushtan to heal some companions from snakebites and disappeared after climbing Mount Pisgah. According to the sura Al-Qasas, after breaking up a second fight involving the same quarrelsome man, this figure fled to Midian. This figure was hidden for three months before being set afloat on a reed basket by Amram and Jochebed, who three years earlier had given birth to Aaron, who constructed the Golden Calf in this man's absence. Getting help from a strong east wind that separated the Sea of Reeds, this figure delivered the Hebrews from Egyptian slavery. For 10 points, name this prophet who received the Ten Commandments on Mount Sinai.", "Moses", "M"]
["In chapter 13 of Exodus, this figure's bones are taken with the Israelites after an oath he made them swear. This figure's father placed his right hand on this figure's younger son Ephraim and his left on Manasseh while blessing him, saying that the younger would be the greater. This figure interpreted the dreams of a baker and cup bearer while in prison for refusing the advances of Potiphar's wife. He later interpreted a dream of seven lean and seven fat cattle for the Pharoah. This man's brothers included Reuben, who disagreed with their plot to kill this figure. For 10 points, name this son of Jacob whose brothers sold him into slavery in Egypt and who owned a multicolored coat.", "Joseph", "H"]
["While this figure is away, Jatasura abducts his companions. In another episode, this figure is saved from the snake Nahusa when one of his companions is able to answer correctly the question \"what is a Brahmin?\" In the kingdom of Virata, this figure is disguised as Ballava the cook, but kills the general Kichaka who had attempted to seduce the woman often called Krishn?. His union with the demoness Hidimb? produces Ghatotkaca, whose death later prevents Karna's infallible spear from killing this figure's brother. This figure, whose main epithet, Vrikodara, means \"wolf-belly,\" makes a vow to break the thigh of his wicked cousin. This son of the wind god Vayu fulfills that vow in mace combat when he fatally wounds Duryodhana. Fond of uprooting trees to use as weapons, his mother Kunti also bore his brothers Yudhisthira and Arjuna. For 10 points, identify this hot-tempered Pandava.", "Bhima", "H"]
["This doctrine got its name from the \"Letter to the Smyrneans\" written by Ignatius of Antioch, in which he disagreed with those who held this position and said that they also refrained from prayer. Irenaeus wrote that Simon Magus espoused a version of this doctrine, which is directly at odds with John 1:14 and several other passages from John's Gospel. Found in such texts as the Gospel of Peter and popular among most Gnostics, this Christological doctrine which differs from Adoptionism has sometimes been theorized to derive from purely dualistic separation of matter and spirit, and those who held this doctrine rejected the Eucharist and the resurrection. Deriving from Greek meaning \"to seem,\" for 10 points, identify this notion that Christ's death on the cross was an illusion, since he was never truly human.", "Docetism", "H"]
["One report of this location claims that it was the site of a feast that occurred every nine years, and one of the beings worshipped at this location was known as \"the Furious.\" This location may also have been the site of an autumn sacrifice called the disablot, which was intended to honor female deities called disir. The remains of this location include three massive burial mounds believed to be the resting places of three kings of the Svear, and most contemporary knowledge of this place comes from the Gesta Hammaburgensis, which also claimed that this place was surrounded with a golden chain and was home to three gold-covered statues of gods. According to Adam of Bremen, the grove near this location would sometimes house the hanged bodies of up to 72 men, horses, and dogs, and this location was also reportedly home to a giant evergreen tree, which represented Yggdrasill. For ten points, identify this location in Sweden, which was the site of worship of such deities as Frey, Thor, and Odin.", "Uppsala", "H"]
["In the second of these works, the narrator kills a kingbird and extracts bees from its mouth, allowing the ones that remained alive to return to their hive. The eleventh is written in the persona of a \"Russian gentleman,\" and describes a visit to the naturalist John Bartram. The ninth of them portrays the narrator's horror at a slave left in a cage to die, and criticizes the effects of slavery on Charleston, South Carolina, which contrasts with the narrator's praise for the industriousness of Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard in the fourth through eighth of them. The third one claims that in the United States, \"individuals of all nations are melted into a new race of men,\" and is titled \"What is an American?\" They are framed as correspondences between the English minister Mr. F. B. and the title character, \"James,\" who describes his cultivation of Pine Hill. For 10 points, name these twelve epistolary works by Hector St. John Crevecoeur.", "Letters from an American Farmer", "H"]
["In one story, this being was held to have followed a beam of light at the end of which were two sisters, whom this being invited to stand on two mountains, thereby creating the sun and moon. In another legend, this being molded an ox out of clay and saliva and set it to carry the earth; so that the ox would not fall asleep, this being also created a clay rooster to keep watch on the ox. First described in the book A Chronicle of the Five Circles of Time as having the body of a snake and the head of a dragon, more common depictions of this deity have him as a giant with a horn on his head, which was supposed to get soft when it was his time to die. This being is one of the few who can send rain without the permission of the Jade Emperor, and according to the Wuyun Linianji, at his death this god's body became the extremes of the earth while insects on it became people. Originally held to have hatched from a primordial egg, for ten points, identify this creator deity of Chinese myth, often considered the first man.", "Pangu", "H"]
["This book's comparison of newspapers to the hundred arms of Vishnu has led many scholars to argue that it was plagiarized from earlier texts. It was translated into English by Victor Marsden from the edition included as an appendix to The Great and the Small by Sergei Nilus. Much of it was adapted from The Dialogue in Hell between Machiavelli and Montesquieu, a satire against Napoleon III by Maurice Joly. Philip Graves's articles attacking this book were cited in the 1934 Berne trial discrediting it. This book begins by claiming that \"right lies in might,\" and argues that the \"Symbolic Snake\" is closing around Europe. It describes plans to create a world \"super-government\" and manufacture economic crises in order to destroy states, and was published by Henry Ford as The International Jew. For ten points, name this notorious anti-Semitic forgery about a Jewish conspiracy to rule the world.", "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion", "H"]
["A reorganization of this group was one of the main achievements of the sage Moggaliputtatissa. In order to have the force of law, actions by members of this group must be performed within a boundary known as sima, according to the correct karmavacana, or formula. Tasks delegated to members of this group include pariyatti and patipatti, and violating any of the parajika injunctions, such as by claiming to possess superhuman powers, is grounds for expulsion from this group. Male members of this group are known as bhikkhu and female members are known as bhikkhuni, and on the days of the full and new moon, members of this group must recite the Pratimoksha. This group, whose rules of conduct are outlined in the Vinaya Pitaka, traces its origin to the time when Siddhartha Gautama accepted five men as followers after preaching his first sermon. Known collectively as the sangha, for ten points, identify this community of ascetics of a major world religion.", "Bhikkhu", "H"]
["Early guidelines for this practice were authored by Andrea Alciati, while Girolamo Muzio's 1550 treatise on this practice was the most popular of its time. In its 24th session, the Congress of Trent condemned this practice, branding it a \"detestable custom... [which] shall be uprooted from Christian soil.\" Fracois de Montmorency-Bouteville was executed by Louis XIII for engaging in this practice, which had been outlawed by Henry IV in 1608. This practice also came under attack from the jurist Jean de Savaron, who had argued that it was responsible for twice as many deaths as the French Wars of Religion, while Montesquieu's Persian Letters satirized this practice as the only way for French aristocrats to resolve differences arising from a \"point of honor.\" The prevalence of this practice in post-Elizabethan England may have come from both an inflation of honors and the proliferation of rapiers, and those engaging in this practice were typically accompanied by a \"second.\" For ten points, identify this cultural practice once popular in Europe which consisted of defending one's honor in combat, typically with guns or swords.", "Duel", "H"]
["In the fourth of these poems, a state council discusses how to cook an enormous turbot for an emperor. The second to last of them describes a fight between two Egyptian towns that results in cannibalism. The narrator of the ninth of them responds to the complaints of the male prostitute Naevolus by assuring him that he will always find clients. The third of these poems laments that the Orontes has flowed into the Tiber, and is spoken by Umbricus. The sixth one compares a good woman to a \"rara avis,\" or \"rare bird,\" and attacks the deceitfulness of women. The tenth advises that men should pray for \"mens sana in corpore sano,\" often translated as \"a sound mind in a sound body,\" and claims that politicians win votes with \"bread and circuses.\" For 10 points, name these sixteen social commentaries attacking the vices of Rome under Domitian, written by Juvenal.", "Satire", "H"]
["In the Tibetan Buddhist tradition, those who perform this action are known as gnas skor ba, and Padmasambhava was said to have revealed targets for this action called sbas yul. In Hinduism, sections of the Puranas called mahatmyas advocate the performance of this action. These actions are accompanied in Hinduism by festivals called the Kumbha Mehla, and popular times for performing this action include the pitr-paksa, a half-month period dedicated to ancestor worship. Among the Moroccan Jewish community, performing this action was tied to participation in hillulot, and in Judaism in general, this practice is called aliyyah le-regel. Known as junrei in Japanese Buddhism, popular ways of performing this action involve the Shikkoku circuit, while among Roman Catholics it may involve visits to such places as Santiago de Compostela. For 10 points, identify this action which is required of Muslims according to the hajj, and which involves taking a journey to a sacred site.", "Pilgrimage", "H"]
["Amplification of these phenomena can occur via over-reflection in the SWING mechanism, which, when present, dominates their WASER amplification mechanism that relies on over-refraction and a Q-barrier. The global stability criterion for a system against their axisymmetric type is a value of at least 1 everywhere for the Toomre Q parameter. Their long type propagate in the principal range between the inner and outer Lindblad resonances. They transport energy and angular momentum outwards outside of a co-rotation radius at which the disk's angular speed matches their pattern speed. They are excited by resonances with Janus, Epimetheus and other moons near Saturn's A ring. For 10 points, name these disturbances hypothesized by Lin and Shu that solve the winding problem of arms of spiral galaxies.", "Density wave theory", "H"]
["At the end of this work, its author notes that he has been reluctant to cite authorities, preferring reasons to them, but nevertheless provides quotes from Aristotle and Boileau to support his position. While this work acknowledges the soundness of the arguments that use \"the example of the ancients,\" its author refuses to reply to them, adding that \"we are constructing no system here... we are a historian, not a critic.\" This work claims that \"the age of the epic draws near its end,\" before outlining how \"Christianity leads poetry to the truth,\" and argues that the perfect combination of the grotesque and the sublime is to be found in Shakespeare. This work opens by claiming that \"the drama contained in the following pages has nothing to commend it to the... good will of the public,\" and associates the grotesque with the new form of comedy, which this work claims is what distinguishes romantic from classical literature. For 10 points, identify this 1827 essay, a manifesto of the new French drama by Victor Hugo which was meant to precede Hugo's play about a British Lord Protector.", "Victor Hugo's Preface to Cromwell ", "H"]
["According to Theosophist Anna Kingsford's Clothed With the Sun, this phrase was uttered because its speaker had what Kingsford called an \"Aeon,\" or \"double portion.\" In his commentaries on the Psalms, John Calvin argued that this phrase, which opens Psalm 22, was composed by David \"under the influence of the Spirit of prophecy,\" alluding to the later recurrence of this phrase in religious literature. In two contexts, the utterance of this phrase leads some people to bring sponges filled with vinegar, and both of the texts which mention that event agree that just prior to the utterance of this phrase, there was darkness over the land from the sixth to the ninth hour. The utterance of this phrase is reported in both Matthew 27:46 and Mark 15:34, after which its speaker is said to \"give up the ghost,\" and in the standard harmonization this phrase, absent from both Luke and John, is the fourth of seven spoken in a certain context. Translating from the Aramaic \"eloi, eloi, lama sabachthani,\" for 10 points, identify this phrase, one of the seven sayings of Christ on the cross.", "Sayings of Jesus on the cross", "H"]
["One chapter in this work tells of how a man named Gobryas made an alliance with this work's main character after the former's king was slain by that character in battle. At one point in this work, it is argued to Chrysantas that \"the best should have the preference both in honors and gifts,\" but this work ends on a sour note, chiding a certain group for allowing rigor to die out while preserving effeminacy, as well as losing the art of chariot warfare. The subject of this work shows his mercy by releasing the wife of Tigranes, the king of Armenia and arranges an expedition to India, while in another section, that subject's men are instructed that \"courage is more likely to save men's lives than running away,\" following a battle against the Assyrians. This work's second chapter begins with a recounting of the lineage of its subject, the son of Mandane and Cambyses, and this work goes on to tell how its main subject overthrew his grandfather Astyages to assume his most famous position. For 10 points, identify this quasi-fictional biography of the founder of the Persian Empire, a treatise on leadership written by Xenophon.", "Cyropaedia", "H"]
["Frank Moore Cross attempted a reconstruction of this group's lineage over the course of 800 years, and Julius Wellhausen used the information contained in Chronicles to further constrain the time during which this group's traditions originated. According to Nehemiah, these people worked in one-week shifts, while Exodus dictated that these people wore a tunic decorated with twelve jewels and two stones. In one tradition, a high administrative official within this group had the title of ha-segan, while Kings repeatedly refers to leaders of this group as ha-gadol, and members of this group made use of oracular objects called \"Urim\" and \"Thummim,\" which were sewn into their efod. The lineage of this group is held to originate with an investiture ceremony described in Exodus, Numbers, and Leviticus, with passages in Numbers describing the transfer of authority to Eleazar. Traditionally held to have originated with Moses' brother Aaron, for 10 points, identify this group, a subset of the Levites who made up the Jewish priesthood.", "Kohen", "H"]
["An analog of this figure from another myth system is Khan Boghu, who dies when the hero Badikan kills seven birds, and this figure often casts a spell that is only reversed by a self-playing lute. In some accounts, this figure was described as the brother of a dragon that guarded the Water of Life and Death and owned either a three-legged or a seven-legged horse; overcoming him involves winning a horse race against him. In the most famous story about this figure, he is tricked by a girl he kidnaps into revealing the hiding place of his most valuable possession, which turns out to be neither inside a broom nor inside of a goat. One story of this figure's demise tells of how he was vanquished by Bulat the Brave and Ivan, who killed this figure for kidnapping Vasilissa, and in most tales, he is overcome by locating an egg inside of a duck inside of a rabbit and breaking that egg. Sometimes seen as the male counterpart to Baba Yaga, for 10 points, identify this antagonist from Slavic myth whose epithet comes from the fact that his soul is not contained in his body but rather in the aforementioned egg.", "Koschei", "H"]
["One ruler with this name married Gyda after the death of his wife Geira, and fought on a vessel called the \"Long Serpent,\" and another king of this name was called \"The Peaceful\" and made a peace with William the Conqueror. One king with this name had a mother who founded the Kalmar Union and served as a regent for Eric of Pomerania, and another figure of this name fled to the Kievan Rus after a loss at the Battle of Helgea and fathered Magnus the Good. The second king with this name was called \"the Big,\" won the Battle of Nesjar, and was killed by the Peasant Army at the Battle of Stiklestad. The first king of this name died at the Battle of Svolder after establishing the first church in his nation and defeating Earl Byrhtnoth at the Battle of Maldon in 991 A.D. For 10 points, identify this name of five kings of Norway, the second of which became Norway's patron saint.", "European Anti-fraud Office", "H"]
["Among the Babylonians, the god Nabu was considered crucial to the rituals associated with this event, which the Babylonians called Akitu. In many Japanese Buddhist sects, this event is accompanied by striking a gong 108 times to symbolize the 108 desires that keep people from salvation. According to Malinowski, among the Trobriand Islanders, this event is accompanied by the Milamala festival, while in pre-Islamic Iran, this event was celebrated at the festival of Nowruz, which today marks one of two such events for Muslims. In Hinduism, this event marks the return of Rama and its associated festival involves the lighting of oil lamps. During the Jewish celebration of this event, the tekiah, shevarim, and teruah are the three notes that sound during the blowing of the shofar. For 10 points, identify this religious festival, examples of which include Diwali and Rosh Ha'shanah.", "The New Year (band)", "H"]
["This man spent the end of his life living in and constructing the town of Timnath-serah. Early in his life, this man and Caleb were the only two of 12 spies who gave a favorable report at Kadesh-Barnea to the Hebrew army. Later, while led by this man, that army lost a battle due to the sins of Achan, who had stolen some silver and gold. This man then asked God in front of the Ark why he would let the Amorites destroy them before leading the army to victory at Ai. Earlier, this man had ordered one man from each tribe to carry a large rock from the middle of a river they had crossed. More famously, this man sent spies into a town who were hidden on a rooftop underneath stalks of grain by Rahab, whose family was saved when the city was conquered. For 10 points, name this man who led the Israelites across the Jordan into the Promised Land after the death of Moses and captured the city of Jericho.", "Joshua", "H"]
["The scholarly study of this movement dates back to Johann Lorenz von Mosheim, who postulated a theory of this movement's spread in his work \"Institutiones christianae maiores.\" The doctrines of this movement were attacked in the work Adversus Haereses by the Bishop Irenaeus, and Gerschom Scholem linked one branch of this movement to the merkavah, or \"chariot\" on which God is said to sit in Ezekiel 1:26. Leaders of major groups of this religious movement included Basilides and the poet Valentinus, and one scholar of this movement hypothesized that it may have had its origins in the thought of St. Paul, whose supposed letter was one of a set of documents discovered along with the Apocryphon of James and the Gospel of Truth in a cache at Nag Hammadi. The figure of Sophia, or \"wisdom,\" played a prominent role in this religious movement, which was the subject of a treatise by Elaine Pagels. For 10 points, identify this religious movement which produced works like the Gospel of Thomas and Gospel of Judas and believed in an imperfect demiurge, whose name comes from the Greek for \"knowledge.\"", "Gnosticism", "H"]
["One early member of this faith founded what would become Cheshnut College for Ministers after six students of this faith were expelled from St. Edmund Hall. That woman, Selina Hastings, Countess of Huntingdon, was instrumental to founding one offshoot of this faith, whose members congregate in societies called \"connections.\" The creation of this religious denomination was inspired by Clement of Alexandria's description of a perfect Christian, and the preaching of this denomination was based on its founder's Sermons and Explanatory Notes Upon the New Testament. This denomination was first established in the United States at the Christmas Conference led by two men appointed co-superintendents by this faith's primary founder, Francis Asbury and Thomas Coke and adheres to its founder's namesake \"quadrilateral\" of scripture, tradition, reason, and experience. For 10 points, name this Protestant Christian denomination primarily based on the teachings of John Wesley.", "Methodism", "H"]
["One year after its passage, this legislation withstood a direct constitutional challenge in the Katzenbach case. Among the provisions of this legislation was a triggering clause that required federal pre-clearance of procedural changes. This legislation's second section was amended in 1982 for the purposed of overturning the ruling of the Supreme Court in City of Mobile v. Bolden and employed a \"totality of circumstances\" approach, while its fourth section was likewise amended in the same year to allow jurisdictions to opt out of coverage if they had been in compliance for the past decade. Pursuant to Section 5 of this legislation, the Justice Department would obtain the right to prosecute such practices as \"single-shot,\" as a result of the 1969 Allen v. Board of Election decision, and this law's 8th section provided for federal overseers to make sure that its title practice was not being unconstitutionally restricted. For 10 points, identify this landmark piece of civil rights legislation, which effectively provided for the enforcement of the 15th Amendment.", "Voting Rights Act of 1965", "H"]
["One of these objects in the village of Gudimallam is about ten feet tall, and is thought to be the oldest one found. The mukha type of these have faces carved in them. Mahakaleshwar is a temple dedicated to the jyotir type, and there are twelve main temples in all dedicated to that type. The base of these is called the Brahmabhaga, while offerings are placed on the top section called the Rudrabhaga. They are often bathed in water from the Ganges to reenact a story from the Ramayana. In multiple stories were it appears, two gods attempt to find its beginning or end, but fail to do so. One story of its origin is that, while trying to determine who should receive a sacrifice, the sage Bhrigu cursed the god it represents to be worshipped in this form. For 10 points, name this object representing a flaming pillar or the phallus of Shiva.", "Lingam", "H"]
["In this work, its author recalls how he once almost went to work for Aman Ullah, the ruler of Afghanistan, and later recalls reading James Jeans' writing about trains. A chapter of this work titled \"Sins of Omission,\" discusses misplaced priorities and the ideology of Philipp Lenard, and this work's epilogue contains a conclusion in which the author admits skepticism about technology despite having \"devoted crucial years of [his] life to serving it.\" In this work's chapter \"The Thirteenth Hour, the author recounts his collaboration with General Heinrici to remove the blasting charges from various key infrastructure elements. Though this work's author claimed never to have attended the Posen conference, historical research has determined that he was lying in this work when he claimed not to know about the Final Solution. For ten points, identify this autobiographical work written after its author's release from Spandau, which details the interactions between such members of the title regime as Joseph Goebbels and Hermann Goring and the author, Adolf Speer.", "Inside the Third Reich", "H"]
["The figure from Inuit myth associated with this got soot on his forehead after engaging in incest with his sister. The figure of aboriginal myth associated with this had his bones turned into the shells of the sea after his sister was turned into a dugong. Like Dionysus, the Thracian cult goddess associated with this, Bendis, had followers of maenads and satyrs. The figure from Chinese mythology associated with this became immortal after swallowing a pill given by the Xi Wangmu, and was named Chang E. The Sumerian God associated with this fathered Ishtar and Shamash by his wife Ningal, and he was named Nanna. In Shinto, it is associated with a figure who had pink skin because he had all his hair pulled off his skin, the Hare of Inaba, and with the god Tsukuyomi. For 10 points, Hecate, Selene, and Luna are associated with what celestial body?", "Moon", "H"]
["A theory of this religious practice as arising from magic was formulated by Raffaele Pettazzoni, and among the Kikuyu, this practice is accompanied by vomiting. Among the Lotuko people of East Sudan, this practice is conducted by warriors in public before the start of the hunting season, while in Meso-American religions this practice was carried out in the presence of the priests of Tlazolteotl. Zoroastrianism called this practice patet and it could be performed in front of the sun, moon, and divine fire, while Jain monks must perform this action, called pratikarmana, twice daily. In one Christian denominations, this practice is incomplete if only attritio is present rather than contritio. This practice is most commonly associated in the West with communication with a priest, which if done properly ends with the priest saying \"ego te absolvo.\" For ten points, identify this religious practice, the cornerstone of the Roman Catholic Sacrament of Penitence.", "Confessor", "H"]
["A response to this speech criticizes it for preaching a \"doctrine of uniformity,\" and declares that \"this Government was made on the white basis...for the benefit of white men and their posterity forever.\" This speech repeatedly mocks a senator's policy of \"care not,\" and contrasts his stated indifference with those who \"do care for the result.\" It uses the metaphor of \"a lot of framed timbers\" crafted by different workmen, which \"exactly matte the frame of a house or a mill, all the tenons and mortices exactly fitting,\" to describe a conspiracy planned by \"Stephen and Franklin and Roger and James.\" This speech begins \"If we could first know where we are, and whither we are tending, we could then better judge what to do, and how to do it,\" and claims that the Dred Scott decision is a culmination of a plot to legalize slavery in all states. The focus of a debate held later that year at Ottawa, it declares \"this government cannot endure, permanently half slave and half free.\" For 10 points, name this speech by Abraham Lincoln which warns that the United States, like the title building, \"cannot stand.\"", "Gettysburg Address", "H"]
["In Zoroastrianism, this action is usually accomplished with a \"topi\" and must be done before entering a fire temple. This is not a requirement for Druze but can be accomplished with a \"doppa.\" For Sikhs this practice is first undertaken in a ceremony called the \"dastar bandi\" and is more important for men than women because of differences in the location of the \"solar center.\" Female Jehovah's Witnesses only need to adopt this practice when leading services. Paul spends the bulk of chapter 11 of First Corinthians discussing the requirement for this. In Roman Catholicism, it is traditional for clerics to accomplish this using a \"zucchetto.\" In Islam, this practice is never explicitly mandated in the Qu'ran, but the four major schools of jurisprudence believe it should be accomplished with a hijab. For 10 points, name this practice which devout Jews may observe with a kippah or yarmulke.", "Sombrero de catite", "H"]
["One result of this event was \"Operation mafuta mingi\" or \"Get Rich Quick,\" in which stores that had sold out their wares were encouraged to restock. This event was accompanied with the firing of twenty-nine chief police officers, the creation of nine new provinces, and the injuring of U.S. diplomat Pierre Shostal. This event was an extension of the sentiment expressed in Augustine Kamya's 1959 boycott. The perpetrator of this action gave a speech to the Airborne Regiment in the town of Tororo announcing that God came to him in a dream and asked that it be done. This event caused shouts of \"Two, four, six, eight, we don't want to integrate!\" during protests against Edward Heath's government in England. One reason given for this action was that balance books were written in Hindi or Gujarati to intentionally confuse tax collectors, and Julius Nyerere planned a September 17th invasion to coincide with the chaos caused by this event. For 10 points, name this action in which Idi Amin forced people of Chinese and Indian descent from his country.", "Expulsion of Asians from Uganda", "H"]
["Daisaku Ikeda described this work's \"drama of fighting for justice against evil\" in a book-length essay entitled \"The Wisdom of [this].\" Characters in this text include the dull-witted Sariputra, and it elaborates on the concept of upaya, or skillful means. Its opening states that its central figure is on Vulture's Peak, or Gridhrakuta, and in it, Manjushri explains a mysterious 'fine luster' to Maitreya. Its third chapter tells a story in which playful children get a cart driven by white bulls from their father after being persuaded to escape the namesake place; that's the Parable of the Burning House. Its twenty-fifth chapter is the first scriptural evidence of Avalokiteshvara, and it is the most important text of the Japanese Tendai and Nichiren schools. For 10 points, name this text, which claims everyone can reach Buddhahood, a foundational Mahayana Buddhist sutra.", "Lotus Sutra", "H"]
["According to A Treatise on Strange Beings and Things by Li Rong, this deity was ashamed of wedding her brother and so covered her face with a grass fan. In another story, this being was indirectly responsible for the flow of rivers and the movement of stars, and this being and her brother were said to reside on Mount Kunlun. Her husband, Fu xi, was the first of the three sovereigns and according to the Fengshen Yanyi, her subordinates included the Thousand Year Vixen, the Jade Pipa, and the Nine-headed Pheasant. She is commonly cited in explanations of the mandate of heaven, as she carefully shaped some people by hand, while others she created by flinging a rope encrusted with mud droplets. A disagreement with the water god Gong Gong lead to her most famous action, which she accomplished with the use of five rainbow stones. For 10 points, name this Chinese deity who created humans from clay and patched up the sky.", "N\u00fcwa", "H"]
["The \"Western Text Tradition\" for this book derives from a manuscript given by Theodore Beza to the University of Cambridge. In this book's final chapter, a man is bitten by a snake while preparing a fire, and local inhabitants believe the traveler to be first an escaped murderer, and then perhaps a god. The father of a governor named Publius is cured of dysentery at the end of this book, after the survivors of a shipwreck land on Malta. The second chapter of this book tells of men who are \"all Galileans,\" but nevertheless speak in the fashion of \"Parthians, Medes, and Elamites\" during Pentecost. This book discusses the martyrdom of Stephen and the conversion of Saint Paul. For 10 points, the Gospel of Luke is thought to share an author with what fifth book of the New Testament?", "Sceva", "H"]
["A tale of his youth says that this man could not stop praying until he drowned out the cries of a male sparrow. Also as a child, this man explained to his teacher that the straight line which comprises the first letter of the Persian alphabet is a metaphor for the unity of God. This man promulgated the three principles of living honestly, helping others, and ceaseless devotion to God, or naam japna. The earliest accounts of the life of this author of the Muul Mantar declaration of faith are included in the Janamsakhis and Vars written by Bhai Gurdas. He proclaimed \"there is no Hindu and no Muslim\" before his death in the 1530s, when he turned into a pile of flowers and was succeeded by Angad. For 10 points, identify this founder and first guru of Sikhism.", "Guru Nanak", "H"]
["One holiday of this type occurs on the tenth of Dhu al-Hijjah and remembers Abraham's near-sacrifice of Isaac. For 10 points each\" [01] Identify this kind of Islamic holiday, another of which is celebrated by donating barley or dates to the poor and includes the first daytime eating in thirty days' time.", "Eid", "H"]
["In Nepal, the Hindu ritual of \"khun khane,\" which requires a non-lactating yak, involves doing this. The prohibition on doing this is why meat killed more than three days ago and all liver must be broiled before eating in one religion. The avoidance of this activity is also why that religion's rules specify the use of medium-coarse salt. An alleged attempt to do this on a ritual basis was claimed as the reason for William of Norwich's abduction and for Father Thomas's death in the Damascus affair. Anti-Semites often claim that this is done while eating matzah, which makes up a certain \"libel\" against Jews. For 10 points, identify this taboo practice in Islam and Judaism, which in Christianity is miraculously done from the Eucharist cup.", "Drinking", "H"]
["The speaker of this poem asserts he will use \"all the scenes of life and the workshops\" to decorate a house after asking, \"what shall I hang on the chamber walls?\" The speaker has a vision of the \"debris of all the slain soldiers of war\" in which he notes the dead \"suffered not / The living remained and suffered.\" The speaker describes walking with his companions \"the knowledge of death\" and \"the thought of death\" to a swamp where they hear a thrush sing the \"carol of death.\" The speaker of this poem leaves a flower on a coffin that he watched \"pass through lanes and streets\" after earlier lamenting \"the great star early droop'd in the western sky in the night.\" For 10 points, name this elegy for Abraham Lincoln by Walt Whitman.", "When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd", "H"]
["A one-hundred day indulgence is acquired whenever one makes proper use of this substance, which is sometimes distributed from a device called an asperges. Gregory IX ordered that this substance be mixed with ashes and salt and used in the construction of new churches. In the Eastern Orthox Church, a \"great blessing\" named for this substance is said at the feast of Theophany and this substance is heated and added to the wine during the Eucharist in the ritual of zeon. This substance is always replenished on the day before Easter, when it is used to fill the baptismal font. For 10 points, identify this substance which is sprinkled on parishioners entering a Catholic Church and is created by a priestly blessing over H2O.", "Holy water", "H"]
["One religion originating in this country engages in the \"practice of the flame\" ritual and believes that this country is the last remaining part of the lost continent of Mu. Like the British Israelites, that group believes that the inhabitants of this country are in fact the lost tribe of Levi. Another group from this country promotes the \"Joyous Life\" ideal and is the largest religion ever founded by a woman. About twenty-five percent of this country follows the so-called \"new religions,\" one of which was led by a man who sold his own blood as a cure-all and orchestrated the use of umbrella-popped balloons to distribute sarin gas. This country's dominant religion has holy sites such as the Grand Shrine of Ise and the Golden Pavilion. For 10 points, identify this home of Tenrikyo, Aum Shinrikyo, and Shinto.", "Japan", "H"]
["In medieval Europe, proving that one possessed this quality was all that was needed to escape the jurisdiction of civil courts. South Carolina prohibited any slave from receiving this quality in the wake of the Stono Rebellion. In Louisiana, one proved this trait by answering SAT-style math problems; in Alabama, it had to be demonstrated by a four-page examination about the Constitution. In all states which tested for this, \"grandfather clauses\" exempted most whites from the test. The \"benefit of clergy\" was demonstrated by, for 10 points, what skill, which was tested for by discriminatory voting laws in the Jim Crow South and consists of the ability to read and write?", "Literacy", "H"]
["On this holiday, Malkhuyot, Zikhronot, and another blessing are added to the Musaf service. On the eve of this holiday, Ashkenazi recite the Akeidah, Chatanu, and Techinah prayers, which are subsets of the Selichot prayers. Followed the next day by a fast commemorating Gedaliah, it is believed to be the day when God opens the Sefer HaChaim, or Book of Life. It also includes the tashlikh, a ceremony in which crumbs are thrown into an open body of water. Apples dipped in honey are consumed on this two-day holiday, which begins on the first of the ten Days of Awe. Immediately preceded by the month of Elul, it occurs on the first and second of Tishrei, about nine days before Yom Kippur. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday on which the shofar is blown to commemorate the new year.", "Rosh Hashanah", "H"]
["The most notable change of doctrine about these people came about after the author of The Miracle of Forgiveness spent a day alone in the \"Upper Room.\" These people's particular needs are addressed through a fraternal organization known as the Genesis Group. Offshoot movements such as the Strangites and Bickertonites often elevated these people to positions of leadership to differentiate themselves. In 1966, Bruce McConkie wrote that these people were \"less valiant in the pre-existence.\" One of these people, Enoch Lewis, inspired a change in doctrine about them when he married Matilda Webster. They were the subject of Spencer Kimball's \"Official Declaration--2\", and according to a now-abandoned doctrine, they were created when Ham married Egyptus, who was a descendant of Cain. For 10 points, identify this group within Mormonism who, as of 1978, may become priests, and who were never specifically forbidden from miscegenation.", "Black Mormons", "H"]
["The libration theory of the formation of these claims that oscillations increase at certain points, while the most commonly accepted theory for their formation is based on Wisdom's calculations. Paradoxically, the same mechanism that appears to explain their existence gives rise to the position of the Plutinos and Twotinos in the Kuiper belt, as well as the Hilda family and 279 Thule. Recently found to contain some high-eccentricity objects such as the Griqua and Alinda familises, they occur prominently at 2.95, 2.82 and 2.5 AU, distances which correspond to 7:3, 5:2 and 3:1 resonances with Jupiter, respectively. For 10 points, name these regions of the asteroid belt, which are nearly devoid of asteroids.", "Kirkwood gap", "H"]
["One chapter in this book features a marriage meal where fine linens are distributed to a select few. The people of Sardis are call \"dead\" despite having \"a name that [they] are alive,\" and the people of Laodicea's works are \"neither hot nor cold\" in this book. Emeralds, jasper, carnelians, and crystals are used to describe the Throne in Heaven in this book, and there are angels continually chanting \"Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord God Almighty.\" Golden bowls are poured in this text to symbolize God's vengance alongside seven seals broken and seven trumpets blown. Usually attributed to John, for 10 points, name this book of the Bible featuring four horsemen and the final battle between good and evil, considered the last canonical book.", "Book of Revelation", "H"]
["One group of these people brought their grievances to the attention of the government in a series of documents called the \"bark petitions.\" Since 1972 a group of these people led by Michael Anderson have maintained a \"Tent Embassy\" in protest. The last uncontacted members of this group were discovered in 1984 and known as the Pintupo Nine. Many of these people were killed in the 1930s in the Caledon Bay crisis, and they later participated in the Pilbara strike. The report \"Bringing Them Home\" and the establishment of \"National Sorry Day\" tried to reconcile on atrocity against these people, in which thousands of children were taken away from their parents to be raised by whites. For 10 points, name these people who received an official apology from Kevin Rudd for the Stolen Generations.", "Aboriginal Australians", "H"]
["This figure was said to have become omniscient near a sal tree at the shore of the Rjupalika river. His followers disagree on whether or not his embryo was transplanted from another woman into his mother's womb by Indra. After allowing himself to be bitten by insects for twelve years, he attained the state of kevala and proclaimed the \"five great vows,\" one more than his predecessor Parshvanatha. This advocate against the Brahmanic practice of large-scale animal sacrifice was the son of Trishala, the last of twenty-four women who had exactly fourteen auspicious dreams, heralding the birth of this final \"ford-maker\" or Tirthankara. For 10 points, name this sixth-century BCE Indian who preached \"ahimsa\" and founded Jainism.", "Mahavira", "M"]
["This leader spent thirty-eight years in the city of Gibeah. A member of the Tribe of Benjamin and the son of Kish, this religious figure refused to execute King Agag the Amalekite and opposed a divine mandate regarding special privileges of Levite priests by personally offering sacrifices to God. He was then told that God would summarily depose him. Later, an evil spirit possessed this man to kill his eventual successor, a general in his army. Advised by Samuel, for 10 points, name this first king of Israel, succeeded by David.", "Saul", "M"]
["Members of this religion are encouraged to maintain a year's supply of food in homes known as \"the Lord's storehouse,\" and their dietary restrictions follow those outlined in the Word of Wisdom. Auxiliary texts central to this religion include The Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. After a riot in Illinois, which killed their founder, this religious group underwent a \"pioneer\" phase. Believing that their namesake book was transcribed from gold tablets buried in upstate New York, for 10 points, name this offshoot of Christianity, founded by Joseph Smith, whose most famous members include Ken Jennings and Brigham Young.", "Mormonism", "M"]
["One metaphor in this religion treats its laws as 'choice wine' to be savored; those laws include payment of a fine to the Local Spiritual Assembly for fornication and the facing of the Qiblih in once-a-day prayer. In 1957, its Guardian Shoghi Effendi died. Mandating a yearly fast of 19 days' length, this priestless religion's holy scriptures include the Book of Aqdas and the Book of Certitude, and practitioners of this faith with a Universal House of Justice in Haifa, Israel, tolerate all faiths as paths towards God. Symbolized by a nine-pointed star, for 10 points, name this monotheistic religion founded in 19th century by the Bab and Baha'ullah.", "Ba'ha'i Faith", "M"]
["This system of belief holds that the universe will be remade as part of Frashokereti, whereupon the protector of asha will defeat his antithesis. To prevent the spread of nasu, or corruption, its believers place corpses atop dakma towers. Though it didn't originate in India, many adherents of it live there; those people are known as Parsis. The primary holy text of this religion contains the Yashts and Gathas; that text, the Avesta, chronicles the conflict between the evil Ahriman and the good Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, identify this Persian religion, founded in the second millenium BCE by the prophet for whom it is named.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["The holy book of this holiday includes the conspiracy of Bigtan and Teresh, and it involves the exchanging of food baskets known as mishloach manot. Its story involves a 180-day feast in which Vashti refused to dance for guests; that reading of that story on the 14th of Adar requires saying the name of ten sons in one breath and using noisemakers called groggers to blot out the villain's name. That villain, Haman, despises Mordecai and is foiled by Esther in trying to kill Persia's Jews. For 10 points, name this Jewish spring holiday involving costumes and masks.", "Purim", "M"]
["This work's word paracletus is often interpreted by clergy to mean the Holy Spirit. Its central figure is described as \"the one true vine\" and this book, which isn't Revelation, includes Seven Signs. Originating the line \"Let he who is without sin cast the first stone,\" many editions translate its opening sentence's word logos so it reads \"In the beginning there was the Word.\" Containing no parables, it recounts the raising of Lazarus and includes the fact that \"God so loved the world that he gave us his\u0085 son\" in chapter 3, verse 16. For 10 points, name this final, non-Synoptic Gospel which comes after Matthew, Mark, and Luke.", "Gospel of John", "M"]
["One food item eaten during this holiday is named after the Greek word for dessert. At separate points during this holiday's central event, three and ten drops of wine are spilled. Ritual washings during that event are called Urchatz and Rach'tzah, and food items such as Maror, or bitter herbs, are consumed. The youngest children present traditionally sing a song known as Mah Nishtanah, which asks four questions about this holiday. The event on which this holiday is based involved the faithful marking their doors with lamb's blood; today, the main preparation for this holiday involves purging one's house of leavened bread. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday which commemorates the Exodus from Egypt.", "Passover", "M"]
["The Nuer of Sudan perform the \"ghost\" type of it, and in central Asia, ala kachuu is an example of performing this \"by capture,\" acquiring one central component of this phenomenon on horse or by car. In traditional Judaism, these phenomena are undone by a document known as a get, and in Tibet, multiple brothers engage in a single one of these. Subject to endogamy and exogamy rules, these compacts often involving the gifting of dowries. For 10 points, name this kinship-creating contract often between a husband and wife.", "Marriage", "M"]
["Melchizadek blessed this figure, introduced in the Torah parsha entitled \"Lech L'cha.\" He planted a tamarisk tree and swore an oath with Abimelech at Be'er Sheba, and lied twice that his wife was his sister. This son of Terah and brother of Nahor and Heran smashed all the idols in his father's shop in Ur, and successfully argued that ten good men should spare the city in Sodom before fleeing that city with Lot. He received a name change after being sent to Canaan by God. For 10 points, name this husband of Sarah, patriarch to Jews, Christians, and Muslims alike.", "Abraham", "M"]
["This activity occurs between the 8th and 12th days of the last month of a certain purely lunar calendar. Similar to the umrah, activities in this ceremony include running between the hills of Safa and Marwah, a ritual throwing of stones in Mona, and drinking from the well of Zamzam. Participants are in a state of ritual purity, or ihram, and wear simple white garments in which they circle a black cubical shrine called the Ka'aba seven times. Required at least once in the lifetime, for 10 points, name this fifth pillar of Islam, a ritual pilgrimage to Mecca.", "Hajj", "M"]
["Huike was the second patriarch of this subdiscipline, which claims its origins lie in a wordless event during which the disciple Mahakasyapa attained nirvana, the Flower Sermon. The founder of this movement was a Persian or Tamil monk named Bodhidharma, who travelled to China along the Silk Road.Unlike esoteric schools such as Shingon, this movement downplays scriptural study in favor of shocking its practitioners into brief enlightenment called satori. It also uses statements such as \"What is the sound of one hand clapping,\" koans. For 10 points, name this branch of Buddhism popular in Japan.", "Zen", "H"]
["According to legend, these indigenous peoples lost their status as a pure race when their chief sent two four-year old boys on a mission - those boys dropped the \"Camel Rock\" that they were carrying when they were fooled by a twinkling star - and, as a result, that rock was no longer able to stop foreigners from invading the lands of these people. That legend is written on the \"Star Cave\" pictographs of these peoples in the Ritidian cavern. Their pre-historic culture consisted of three classes - the matua, the atchoat, and the mangatchang or lower classes. They were historically susceptible to Lytico-bodig disease, a fact written about by Oliver Sacks in his book The Island of the Colorblind. The dwellings of these people, like those around the Fena Lake region, were built upon the so-called \"Latte stones\" which are often cited as symbols of their early culture. The \"Lost Pond\" village of these peoples is centered around the modern-day area of Hagatna, or Agana. FTP, name these indigenous residents of a certain Pacific island in the Marianas which is now a U.S. territory.", "Chamorro", "H"]
["A protein found in snake venom which inactivates serpins contains a \"Met-turn\" coordinated to this ion. That protein, Adamalysin II, is related to a family of proteins with a \"cysteine switch\" region that catalyze breakdown of collagen, also containing this metal in their active site. Two ions of this element activate a water molecule and the serine residue at the active site of alkaline phosphatase. This element is also critical to the activity of an enzyme which allows for interconversion of carbon dioxide with bicarbonate, carbonic anhydrase, and an enzyme which produces acetaldehyde from alcohols. Also found in binding domains of a protein associated with DNA polymerase, FTP, name this metal found in alcohol dehydrogenase and those namesake cysteine and histidine- filled \"fingers.\"", "GLIS2", "H"]
["According to legend, the arrows owned by this figure were each tipped with a half-ounce of gold - so that, even if they killed their target, the gold could be sold by the victim's family to ease their suffering. He wrote a letter called the \"Zafarnamah\" or \"Epistle of Victory\" which describes the Battle of Chamkaur, where he shot two arrows into the bed of Wazir Khan. Upon death, he used his horse Dilbagh to ascend to heaven at Nanded. Five of his followers were known as the \"Panj Piare,\" or beloved ones, because they had enough faith to go into his tent even after he emerged with a sword dripping blood. Those followers carry daggers, wooden combs, and iron bracelets and were the first members of the Khalsa. He succeeded his father Tegh Bahadur and was pursued for a time by Aurangzeb. FTP, name this tenth guru of Sikhism, the final human one before the Guru Granth Sahib.", "Guru Gobind Singh", "H"]
["A commander by this name once tore off his coat, and fastened it to a pole with a pledge written on it, calling it the \"Title of Liberty.\" That commander wrote a letter to Pahoran which convinced him to aid in slaying Pachus, who had risen to power in Zarahembla. This figure had previously led a counter-revolution against Ameleckiah. The seventh chapter of a book named after this figure states that \"a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water\" and therefore a follower of Christ \"cannot be a servant of the devil.\" In another episode, this figure recounts an epistle from his father rejecting baptism of small children. This last surviving Nephite was forced into hiding after his father's forces were destroyed by the Lamanites at Cumorah. FTP, name this son of Mormon who, after his death, became the angel tasked with delivering the Golden Plates to Joseph Smith.", "Moroni", "H"]
["This historical figure was the addressee of a letter known as the Libellus Responsionum, which answered a series of questions that he had posed, and reached him after he'd been sent to meet with Aetherius. In his highest post, he was succeeded by his followers Laurence and Mellitus. He convened a conference at Austin's Oak, and then another at Flintshire, where he unsuccessfully attempted to standardize the date of Easter. His work was preceded by that of the Frankish bishop Liudhard, who restored St. Martin's Church where this man preached. He was supported by Queen Bertha, who may have convinced her husband to convert. This figure had been sent by Gregory I to the court of Aethelbert of Kent. FTP, name this missionary who converted the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity, the first Archbishop of England, who shares his name with another saint from Hippo.", "Augustine of Canterbury", "H"]
["We are told that this figure has a body covered in moss, sprouting cypress trees and cedar trees, and that its eyes have a \"winter cherry\" color. To overcome this figure, two characters are instructed to distill some refined liquor and pour it into each of several vats located on a series of gates and platforms. That action is performed by the Foot-Stroking-Elder and the Hand-Stroking-Elder, who are distraught that this figure has abducted the princess Inada. As a result of this figure's defeat, the river Hi becomes a stream of blood. FTP, name this creature with eight heads and eight tails, which yields the sword Kusanagi, upon being slain by Susanowo.", "Yamata no Orochi", "H"]
["Christians carrying this figure's body apocryphally destroyed an evil dragon by making the sign of the cross and tamed wild bulls to carry this man's coffin, overcoming obstacles set by the villainous Queen Lupa. In one story, Mary encouraged this saint to preach by appearing to him atop a pillar, on a site now home to the Basilica of Our Lady of the Pillar. His legend is told in the Codex Calixtinus, which explains that his followers once baptized a pagan bridegroom with a scallop shell, which now symbolizes this saint. His body was discovered after a shepherd named Pelagius noticed a bright star above a field, which King Theodomir gave the Latin name for \"Field of the Star.\" His body was miraculously transported to a country where he preached after he was beheaded by Herod. This saint's miraculous appearance at the Battle of Clavijo saved the Christian force there and gained him the title \"Matamoros.\" FTP, name this apostle, the patron saint of Spain, where his remains are held at a namesake cathedral in Galicia.", "Santiago", "H"]
["According to a myth from Guam, when a girl named Veronica saw her fellow humans disdaining the gods, she evaded destruction by using one of these.", "Rainbow", "H"]
["In Aboriginal beliefs, the transformed sacred objects and powers of the ancestors were known ngaraka wanga, which means the \"country\" of these objects. The Ainu would collect these into keyohniusi based on their origin. During the Hindu Asthi-Sanchaya ceremony, some of these referred to as \"flowers\" are collected. In Jewish folklore, one of these called a Luz can be used to bring the dead back to life. Josiah covers the spots of the Asherah poles he breaks with these. In 2nd Kings 13, a dead man is raised upon contact with these belonging to Elisha. Oded Golan claimed to own those of James, the brother of Jesus. After some time had passed, bleached ones would be moved from the top of a Zoroastrian Tower of Silence into a pit. In the Shang Dynasty, these objects were used to tell the future. In Genesis, Eve is constructed from a particular one of these belonging to Adam. FTP, name these body parts that make up the Grim Reaper.", "Bone", "H"]
["At one point during this section of a larger work, its narrator is advised to \"Live with your head in the lion's mouth\" and to \"agree 'em to death and destruction.\" The shouts of a man named Jackson cause this work's narrator to worry that \"he might crunch me between his teeth like a crisp ginger cookie.\" That narrator observes an American flag tattooed on the belly of a naked woman, whose dance occurs shortly after a school superintendent shouts \"Bring up the little shines!\" In this excerpt from a larger work, the narrator shouts \"social equality\" instead of \"social responsibility\", the latter of which the laughter of a group of white men had forced him to repeat. After a one-on-one bout against a man named Tatlock, this chapter's narrator is tricked into jumping onto an electrified carpet to retrieve gold coins, before finally being allowed to give the speech that wins him a scholarship to an all-black college. FTP, name this separately-published first chapter of Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man.", "Professional wrestling battle royal", "E"]
["That story describes how this phenomenon was found by a man tending his father-in-law Jethro's flock on Mount Horeb. While investigating it, Moses was told to deliver the children of Israel out of slavery in Egypt. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which a certain plant was engulfed in fire without being consumed.", "The Burning Bush", "E"]
["This office is symbolized by gold and silver keys. The time during which this office is vacant is termed sede vacante (SEE-day vah-KAHN-tay). The holder of this office is elected in a conclave of the College of Cardinals and wears the Ring of the Fisherman, which depicts St. Peter, the first holder of this office. For 10 points, identify this head of the Roman Catholic Church, whose current holder is Benedict XVI.", "Pope", "E"]
["One creation story from this religion claims that all beings were sprung from one-fourth of Purusa(POO-roo-SAH), while the Puranas (\"PURR\"-on-AHS) describe how the world is created, sustained, and destroyed by three gods in the form of a lotus flower. Other texts important in this religion include the Mahabharata (mah-HAH-bah-RAH-tah), the Ramayana (RAH-mah-YAH-nah), and the Vedas (VAYduhs). For 10 points, what religion centers on the three gods Vishnu, Shiva, and Brahma?", "Hinduism", "E"]
["This holiday commemorates the result of a trial before the Sanhedrin (san-HEE-drin), which was led by Caiaphas (KYE-uh-fuss). Some believe that trial took place the day before, leading them to begin observation of this holiday a day early. It commemorates the day that Pontius Pilate (PON-ti-US PYElate) attempted to prevent rioting by permitting the execution of Jesus Christ. For 10 points, name this holiday that occurs two days before Easter.", "Good Friday", "E"]
["The scholar John Marshall described this text as a parable of the civil wars gripping Rome, and he regards it as a Jewish text written by John of Patmos. The seven heads of the beast described in this book are often interpreted as the succession of seven Roman emperors during the first century. This book also describes the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. For 10 points, name this last book of the New Testament.", "Book of Revelation", "E"]
["This text was written down by Sahabas (sah-HAH-bahs) after the death of the leader that received it. The clarification of the meaning and significance of this document is the practice of tafsir (TAHFSEER). Its hundred and fourteen chapters are called suras (soor-AHS). It literally means \"the recitation\" and is said to have been revealed by Gabriel to Muhammad. For 10 points, what \"divinely ordained\" religious text is sacred to Muslims?", "Quran", "E"]
["One justification of this act is Paul's visit to Ephesus in the Acts of the Apostles. This act involves asking the Holy Ghost to \"send forth upon them thy sevenfold Spirit the Holy Paraclete (PAIR-uh- CLEET).\" This act is the imposition of hands and anointing with oil by a bishop. For 10 points, identify this sacrament grouped in the Catholic Church with Baptism and Eucharist.", "Confirmation", "E"]
["Observers of this holiday often eat jelly-filled doughnuts called sufganiyot (soof-GAH-nee-yoat) and potato pancakes called latkes. They may play a game with a spinning top whose sides are marked nun, gimel, hey, and shin on this holiday; that object is called a dreidel (DRAY-duhl). It commemorates the successful revolt against Antiochus (an-tee-OH-kuss) led by Judah Maccabee. For 10 points, name this wintertime Jewish holiday that includes the lighting of a Menorah.", "Hanukkah", "E"]
["This building was constructed with help from Hiram (HYE-ruhm), King of Tyre (\"TIRE\"). It contained two large pillars named Jachin (JAH-hin) and Boaz. It was ostensibly built on Mount Moriah, which is now home to the Dome of the Rock. This building housed the Ark of the Covenant. After it was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar (NEH-boo-kah-NEZZ-er), it was rebuilt, only to be destroyed again in 70 CE. For 10 points, identify this place of worship first built by Solomon.", "Temple in Jerusalem", "E"]
["Seven laws that apply to non-Jews are named for this figure, whose nakedness was uncovered by one of his sons. An agreement this figure made with God is symbolized by the rainbow. He was the son of Lamekh (LAH-meck) and had three sons, Japheth (JAY-feth), Ham, and Shem. To confirm that one of his jobs was complete, he sent a dove to check for dry land. For 10 points, identify this Biblical character who took two animals of each kind in his ark.", "Noah", "M"]
["One story in this book sees a hand turning leprous white in Midian. This book describes Goshen, which is not affected by a hailstorm. A prophetess who sang by the shore of a sea after a triumphant incident is the brother of one of this book's central figures, who is \"slow of speech\" and the brother of Miriam and Aaron. That figure from this book murders a slave-driver, sees a burning bush, and leads Hebrews enslaved by Pharaoh. For 10 points, name this book that chronicles Moses leading the Israelites from Egypt.", "Exodus", "M"]
["This religion was founded by a philosopher who wrote a text emphasizing three \"jewels\" or \"treasures,\" basic virtues sometimes translated as Compassion, Moderation and Humility. Its founder is portrayed alongside Confucius and the Buddha in the painting \"The Vinegar Tasters.\" Its symbols include the Taijitu, which represents Yin and Yang. Its pantheon includes the Jade Emperor and its founder Lao Tzu. For 10 points, name this Chinese religion and philosophical school whose name means \"way\" or \"path.\"", "Taoism", "M"]
["This sect takes inspiration from a text in which the disciple Mahakasyapa receives prajna. In addition to the Flower Sermon, texts in this sect include The Gateless Gate and The Blue Cliff Record. Its founder, Bodhidharma, spread this religion into China where it is called Chan. Members of this religion attempt to gain satori through reflective contemplation. The Rinzai school of this sect in Japan makes use of koan poems as a means of self-inquiry. For 10 points, name this branch of Mahayana Buddhism that emphasizes self-realization through meditation.", "Zen", "M"]
["One man by this name, the third son of Mattathias, defeated Apollonius' army and vanquished Lysias, allowing him to conquer Jerusalem and establish the Hasmonean dynasty. Another man with this name kissed his leader in front of a group of soldiers and later died by hanging or by having his sides burst open. That man with this name kept a purse for his community and purchased the Potter's Field with 30 pieces of silver. For 10 points, give the name shared by a man named Maccabeus who purified the Temple, and a man named Iscariot who betrayed Jesus.", "Judas Iscariot", "M"]
["The first version of this rite was described as \"compensatory\" in a chapter of The Sealed Nectar. Participants in this rite stay at Mina. At the conclusion of this rite, participants say a tawaf and sa'i before shaving their heads. Requirements of this rite include stoning the Devil and traveling to Mt. Arafat for a day of prayer called Wuquf. Men undergoing this rite must wear the ihram, and its central action involves circling the Kaaba seven times. For 10 points, name this fifth pillar of Islam, a pilgrimage to Mecca.", "Hajj", "M"]
["In this religion's belief system, an inhabitant of Zarahelma discovered the nation of Coriantumr, the last refuge of the Jaredites. This religion's texts include Doctrines and Covenants and The Pearl of Great Price. A leader of this religion was killed at Nauvoo, spurring his followers to move west in 1846 and '47. The Golden Plates found by Joseph Smith provided the basis for the namesake book of this religion, which was once led by Brigham Young. For 10 points, name this religion of the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.", "Mormons", "M"]
["The entire Hallel is only recited on the first day of this holiday, which begins on the 15th of Nisan. Before its observation, all chametz must be removed. Maror and charoset are among the special foods consumed on this holiday, on which observers eat bitter herbs to remember the enslavement of their people. This observance is also called the Feast of the Unleavened Bread. For 10 points, give this Jewish holiday named for the Angel of Death sparing the lives of the firstborn sons, which celebrates the deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt.", "Passover", "M"]
["One biography of this figure is Wake Up, a non-academic 1955 treatment by Jack Kerouac. This person's birth is said to have been presaged by his mother's dream of a white elephant with six tusks piercing her right side. While a young man this religious figure came upon a withered old man, a sick man, a rotting corpse, and finally an ascetic. Faced with the reality of suffering and death, this man tried asceticism but finally accepted the Middle Way, creating the first Sangha with five followers. FTP who is this religious figure who espoused the Four Noble Truths?", "Gautama Buddha", "M"]
["On a journey from Padan-Aram to Canaan, this figure gave the place Mahanaim its name. This figure was renamed following an event at Penuel after which he declared \"I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.\" This figure was tricked by his uncle Laban [LEY-buhn] into working an extra seven years to obtain his desired wife. This son of Isaac and Rebekah obtained his brother's birth right in exchange for some lentil soup. For 10 points, name this husband of Rachel and twin brother of Esau who once wrestled with an angel", "Israel", "M"]
["This site of the Quba Mosque first became historically significant after an influx of Jewish tribes after the losses to Rome in the 2nd century CE. This city was defended from the Quraysh in the Battle of Badr and later in the siege known as the Battle of the Trench. It is the burial site of the Rightly Guided Caliphs Abu Bakr and Umar, and its Masjid al-Nabawi houses even more significant remains. FTP identify this Arabian city, to which Muhammad fled from Mecca in 622 in an act known as the Hijra", "Medina", "M"]
["One practice of this religion has been banned in many places due to fights in meetinghouses. This religion sponsors \"firesides\" that are teleconferenced to meetinghouses, and its members meet twice a year at a General Conference to hear from leaders like David A. Bednar and Thomas S. Monson. This religion, notorious for its church-sponsored basketball leagues, meets in buildings called stake centers and temples, as well as the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City. For 10 points, name this religion, founded by Joseph Smith and taken west by Brigham Young to Utah.", "Mormons", "M"]
["In this book of the Christian bible, \"fiery serpents\" were sent to bite Israelites who had complained about a major prophet, and to cure them they had to look upon a brass snake he fashioned. In this book, twelve spies were sent to investigate one area, and two came back to report that they had seen the giant descendants of Anak, but Joshua and Caleb also stated that the land flowed with \"milk and honey.\" However, when the twelve tribes, fearing the giants, refuse to go, God makes them wander the desert for forty years. FTP this describes what fourth book of the Old Testament, much of which presents census results.", "Number", "M"]
["One text named for this figure claims that the spiritual father of humanity is named Adamas. Some scholars believe this figure was a member of the Sicarii, \"dagger-men\" who were attempting to lead a rebellion. The Gospel of Barnabas claims that he was crucified and that his body was stolen, while another text about this figure claims that death is a return to a \"luminous cloud\". John claims that this figure took money from the apostles' money box for personal use, and scripture disagrees as to whether his body split open or whether he hung himself in the potter's field after receiving thirty pieces of silver for kissing Jesus. For 10 points, name this famous traitor", "Judas Iscariot", "M"]
["This religion was discussed in a work that describes the \"invisible screen\" of the media and which is titled for \"Covering\" this religion. Another work about this religion includes the chapter \"Two Countries, Two Cultures\" and discusses the dissolution of personality it creates after describing this religion's growth to regions like Sumatra, Borneo, and Celebes. Edward Said's works about this religion, which was \"Observed\" by Clifford Geertz, discuss its representation as oppressive and extremist in the Western media. For 10 points, name this religion, found in countries like Indonesia and Morocco.", "Islam", "M"]
[". The only follower of this man for a period of time was his cousin Maidhyoimangha. One work composed by this figure is divided into seventy two chapters known as Yasnas, which include a section named Ahunavaiti. That work, the Gathas, was written by this figure who is said to have laughed rather than cried when he was born. This man received seven revelations, which included his ascension into God's presence and his triumph over the Satan-like demon, Ahriman. He was inspired to write his faith's holy book, the Avesta, by its supreme god, Ahura Mazda. FTP, name this prophet of a namesake religion, among the first monotheistic faiths.", "Zoroaster", "M"]
[". Hindus engage in this practice on Ashtami, the eighth day of the festival of Durga Puja. The people of Jabesh engaged in this practice for seven days after burying the bones of Saul and his sons, killed by the Philistines. Firstborn Jewish sons are meant to do this on the 14th of Nisan, the day before Pesach, to commemorate their salvation from the plague of the firstborns in Egypt, and all Jews are to do this on Yom Kippur, even if it falls on Sabbath. FTP what is this practice called Sawm in Islam, and practiced from sun-up to sundown during Ramadan?", "Fasting", "M"]
["The Lithuanian Talmudist, Vilna Gaon was a staunch critic of this movement, whose opponents are called the Misnagdim. This movement's founder rejected the Musar's practice of ethical admonishment. This religious group's central tenets include a belief in the omnipresence of God, and \"Devekus,\" or the need for communion between God and Man. Male members of this religious group are often distinguished by Tzitzit, white threads hanging from the waist, and by \"payot,\" long uncut sideburns. For 10 points, name this branch of Orthodox Judaism founded in the 18th century by Rabbi Baal Shem Tov, known for its pietistic and anti-legalistic tradition.", "Hasidic Judaism", "M"]
["The Mamluk ruler Baybars erected a mosque at the site where he thought this figure was buried at Maqam Al-Nabi. This figure's name means \"to draw out\" and he could turn his hand leprous by covering it. He was able to draw water by hitting a rock on Mt. Horeb. He fathered the sons Gershom and Eliezer on Zipporah, daughter of Jethro, a priest of Midian. The war with the Amaleks was won because Hur and Aaron held his arms aloft and his skin glowed the second time he descended Mt. Sinai. FTP, who is the man entrusted with the Ten Commandments?", "Moses", "M"]
["The Mamluk ruler Baybars erected a mosque at the site where he thought this figure was buried at Maqam Al-Nabi. This figure's name means \"to draw out\" and he could turn his hand leprous by covering it. He was able to draw water by hitting a rock on Mt. Horeb. He fathered the sons Gershom and Eliezer on Zipporah, daughter of Jethro, a priest of Midian. The war with the Amaleks was won because Hur and Aaron held his arms aloft and his skin glowed the second time he descended Mt. Sinai. FTP, who is the man entrusted with the Ten Commandments?", "Moses", "E"]
["Its eighth chapter discusses the injustices of Antiochus IV Epiphanes and its ninth chapter reinterprets Jeremiah's prophecy. The Catholic version of this book includes the Song of the Three Young Men and the Prayer of Azariah, and Hananiah and Mishael are friends of this book's title figure. The title figure describes the meaning of a tree reduced to a stump and handwriting on the wall to Belshazzar. For 10 points, name this book of the Bible whose title figure is sent to the lion's den.", "Daniel", "E"]
["This belief system's apocalypse is called Frashokereti, and one heresy in this belief system was called Zurvanism. Funerary rites in this religion include leaving the dead on raised platforms called towers of silence, and the primary conflict between good and evil in this religion is represented by the beings Ahura Mazda and Ahriman. For 10 points, name this religion named after a certain Persian prophet.", "Zoroastrianism", "E"]
["This religious practice is observed by most Chinese Buddhists, but is not common among Buddhists elsewhere. [5] For 5 points, what is this behavior, which is common among many Indian religious but not required by Hinduism or Buddhism, and which involves refraining from the consumption of meat?", "Vegetarianism", "E"]
["The doctrine of this practice is derived from a conversation between Jesus and Nicodemus in John 3:5. One figure famous for performing this practice called himself a \"voice in the wilderness\" and was beheaded by Herod Antipas. A now-repudiated doctrine held that infants who died without undergoing this went to limbo. It was practiced by a certain man named John near the River Jordan. For 10 points, name this sacrament in which water washes away original sin.", "Baptism", "H"]
["This religion adheres to the 28 Fundamental Beliefs, among which are \"New Earth\" and \"Great Controversy.\" One co-founder of this religion is the author of Desire of Ages, Ellen Gould White. For 10 points, name this Christian denomination that evolved from the Millerites and that derives its name from the fact that it holds its Sabbath on a nontraditional day of the week.", "Seventh-day Adventist Church", "H"]
["One section of this work describes how Pacumeni was killed by Coriantumr, a man who also successfully seized the city of Zarahemla. Some historians have argued that Sidney Rigdon and Solomon Spaulding contributed to at least some portions of this work. Sections of this work are named for people like (+) Ether and Omni, and it opens with a vision of a pillar of fire being seen by Lehi. This work describes how a group known as the Lamanites forgot their original beliefs, as opposed to the (*) Nephites who still remembered their Hebrew heritage after emigrating to America. This work is held to have been originally crafted on a set of golden plates buried by a man named Moroni. For 10 points, name this religious text, central to a religion founded by Joseph Smith.", "Book of Mormon", "H"]
["Members of this religion took part in the Azusa Street Revival. The first sermon delivered by radio was given by Aimee Semple McPherson, a member of this religion. The best-known preacher of this religion converted from this faith to (+) Methodism in 1968 and later claimed that God threatened to take him \"home\" unless the congregation donated eight million dollars to build a hospital. One debate in this sect concerned whether xenolalia or (*) glossolalia was the correct term for its practitioners' speaking in unlearned tongues, and it also places emphasis on faith healing. For 10 points, name this faith once proselytized by Oral Roberts, which takes its name from the date on which the Apostles received the Holy Spirit.", "Pentecostalism", "H"]
["This religion is promoted by institutions such as the Professor's World Peace Academy, and the daughter-in-law of this religion's founder, Nansook Hong, wrote an expose on this religion. Members of this religion believe that the world was created from the dual expressions of God's inner nature, (+) Sung Sang and Hyung Sang. Its founder was excommunicated from the Presbyterian Church and founded the conservative Washington Times newspaper. In this religion, the creation of the kingdom of God on Earth is promoted through mass (*) wedding ceremonies. For 10 points, name this religious movement founded by Reverend Sun Myung Moon.", "Unification Church", "E"]
["The creation myth of this religion includes a story about the so-called \"Leech Child.\" Another story in this religion tells how Amenouzume (AH-men-oh-oo-zoo-may) drew the sun goddess out of a cave. Harae is a purification rite in this religion, which includes (*) ujigami and hitogami divisions. Izanagi and Izanami are the main figures in this religion's creation story, and Amaterasu (ah-MAH-teh-RA-soo) is this religion's sun goddess. For 10 points, kami are deities in what Japanese religion that once promoted deification of the emperor?", "Shinto", "E"]
["This figure told a group of thirty men a riddle about meat and sweetness, which this figure formed from his finding honey in the carcass of a lion. Anger caused this man to set fire to torches tied into the tails of three hundred foxes, which he set loose into crops. This man lied three times to a woman who later (*) betrayed him to the Philistines. While a prisoner, this man killed himself and many others by bringing down a temple of Dagon. For 10 points, name this Biblical Judge who was betrayed by Delilah and whose incredible strength came from his unshaven hair.", "Samson", "E"]
["One section of this book chastises a people whose \"wine is the venom of serpents, and the cruel poison of asps,\" and is known as the Song of Moses. A verse from chapter six of this book, \"Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is one,\" begins what is known as the Shema in Judaism. This book contains five sermons of Moses dealing with his time in the wilderness. Named after Greek word for (*) \"second law,\" for 10 points, name this book of the Hebrew Bible, which along with Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers comprises the Pentateuch.", "Book of Deuteronomy", "E"]
["One division of this text is into seven manazil for the purpose of its recitation over the course of a week. Its verses are individually known as ayat, and the study of the meaning of those verses is known as ta'wil. It is split into 114 chapters, each of which, with the exception of the first, are generally arranged in order of descending length. Those chapters, which include the notable second one, the (*) \"Cow,\" are called suras. Believed to have been revealed by Gabriel to Muhammad, for 10 points, name this holy text of Islam.", "Quran", "E"]
["People celebrating this holiday often sing the songs \"Mi Y'maleil?\" (ME UH-mal-ell) and \"Ma'oz Tzur\" (MAH-oz TSUHR). This holiday takes place on the twenty-fifth day of Kislev, and commemorates the successful rebellion against Antiochus IV by the sons of Mattathias. During this holiday, believers give gifts of gelt, eat (*) latkes, and gamble by spinning a dreidel. This holiday celebrates an oil lamp in the Second Temple miraculously lasting eight days by having people light eight candles on a menorah. For 10 points, name this Jewish wintertime holiday.", "Hanukkah", "E"]
["The third Spanish monarch of this name married Margaret of Austria and gave up much of his power to his advisor, the Duke of Lerma. The fourth Spanish monarch of this name was advised by Gaspar de Guzman, the Duke of Olivares, and saw considerable influence exercised by Baltasar de Zuniga. The second Spanish monarch of this name ordered the construction of the (*) Escorial and dispatched a fleet to attempt to conquer England. For 10 points, give the common name of these kings, the second of which sent the Spanish Armada.", "Philip", "E"]
["In this book, a man's valor is revealed when the emperor has the court records read to him to help him fall asleep. One character in this book is rewarded by being led around on the king's horse. The book culminates on the Thirteenth of Adar, the date of a mass extermination that was called when (*) Mordechai failed to bow to a court official. This book of the Old Testament is named for the wife of Ahasuerus (ACH-hash-VER-us), who attempts to stop Haman's plot to kill the Jews. For 10 points, name this book that is the basis for the Jewish holiday of Purim.", "Book of Esther", "E"]
["This religion's marriage ceremony includes the engagement ritual Kurmai, which involves the singing of wedding hymns, or laavas. Practitioners of it demonstrate kesh and wear an iron bracelet called a kara. The sacred song (*) \"Japji Sahib\" follows the Mul (mool) Mantra in its sacred text, which was compiled by this religion's fifth leader, Arjun Dev Ji. That book, the Adi Granth, contains many sayings of this religion's founder Guru Nanak. For 10 points, name this north Indian religion, which blends Hindu and Muslim traditions.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["In one of these texts, the title figure is blinded by bird droppings, and Sarah loses seven of her husbands to Asmodeus. In another of these texts, Judith saves the city of Bethulia by killing Holofernes. These texts include the Books of Wisdom and Tobit, as well as the (*) Deuterocanonical books. They are included in Roman Catholic bibles but usually excluded from Protestant ones. For 10 points, name these books of the bible not considered wholly canonical, whose name means \"hidden.\"", "Apocrypha", "E"]
["King Shuddhodana kept this husband of Yashodhara in seclusion for the first twenty-nine years of his life. Upon leaving that seclusion, this man went on four trips, seeing on the trips an old man, a sick man, a corpse, and an ascetic. This man later decided that the best choice was the Middle Way. Mara attacked this man when he sat underneath the (*) Bodhi (BO-dee) Tree. For 10 points, name this man who came to understand the Four Noble Truths after he reached nirvana, and whose teachings formed the basis for an eponymous religion.", "Gautama Buddha", "E"]
["This case was decided jointly with Vignera v. New York and Westover v. United States. This case revised an earlier decision from Illinois that was based on the Sixth Amendment rights of Danny Escobedo. The defendant in this case confessed to raping an eighteen-year-old woman, but the Supreme Court ruled his confession (*) inadmissible because his Fifth Amendment rights had not been upheld. For 10 points, name this Supreme Court case, which requires officers to read apprehended suspects their rights.", "Miranda v. Arizona", "E"]
["Lamech gives a speech to Adah and Zillah comparing himself to this man. In the Quran, Allah sends a raven to instruct this man. In the Bible, he is said to have built a city and named it after his son Enoch after dwelling in the land of (*) Nod. He is given a mark indicating that any who kill him will have vengeance taken on them sevenfold. He is described as a tiller of the ground, and asks \"am I my brother's keeper?\" after completing his most famous action. For 10 points, name this son of Adam and Eve who kills his brother Abel.", "Cain and Abel", "E"]
["The speaker of one section of this book will \"tear you to pieces, with none to rescue\" if you don't consider his proposal. The \"sons of Korah\" are responsible for portions of this book. Other subsets of this book include the Song of Ascents and the Hillel. Orthodoxy highly regards the portion that begins with \"Miserere.\" Another portion describes a figure who \"leadeth me beside the still waters\" and notes \"my (*) cup runneth over,\" comparing the lord to a shepherd. For 10 points, identify this book which was largely authored by David and consists of 150 songs.", "Psalms", "E"]
["In one incident, a rival of this man cuts off a corner of this man's robe while he is relieving himself in a cave. With the help of Doeg the Edomite, he massacred the priests of Nob. This man grew so paranoid that he consulted the forbidden witch at (*) Endor. He rescued the city of Jabesh Gilead after being anointed by the prophet Samuel. His rival was the husband of his daughter Michal and had once soothed this man with harp playing before gaining fame by killing Goliath. For 10 points, name this predecessor of David, the first king of Israel.", "Saul", "E"]
["One doctrine held by this religious group is \"occultation\", which claims that the Mahdi was born but disappeared from human contact. Sects within this group include the more mystical Ismailis, and the majority Twelvers. These adherents believe in a series of divinely appointed imams and reject the caliphs in favor of Muhammad's (*) cousin Ali. This group is currently most prominent in Iraq and Iran. For 10 points, name this smaller of the two major branches of Islam, along with Sunni.", "Shia Islam", "E"]
["One leader of this church was William Juxon, who held a position previously held by figures such as Matthew Parker and William Laud. This church's Thirty-Nine Articles were derived from the work of Thomas Cranmer, who also wrote the Book of Common Prayer. Its creator was excommunicated by Paul III, and Clement VII refused to (*) annul that man's marriage to Catherine of Aragon so he could marry Anne Boleyn. For 10 points, name this church formed by Henry VIII.", "Anglican Communion", "E"]
["This man documented his conversion in Commentary on the Book of Psalms. He was invited by Martin Bucer to lead refugees at the town of Strasbourg, which he had unsuccessfully attempted to visit during a trip that ended at another place. At that location, this man aided William Farel in reforming the church and denounced the heretic (*) Michael Servetus. His magnum opus had a preface addressed to Francis I on the behalf of persecuted Huguenots. For 10 points, name this author of Institutes of the Christian Religion who led the Reformation in Geneva.", "John Calvin", "E"]
["Dominican friars sing \"Laetabundus\" on the morning of this day. It occurs twelve days before Epiphany. Eastern Orthodox churches celebrate it on January 7 due to discrepancies between the Gregorian and Julian calendars. In the wake of the English Civil War, the Puritans banned celebration of this holiday. One popular theory states its date was chosen to coincide with the Roman festival for (*) Sol Invictus, to encourage the spread of Christianity. For 10 points, name this holiday preceded by Advent and celebrated with trees and presents on December 25th.", "Christmas", "E"]
["A group known as the Sephardi was among the chief targets of this event. This event targeted groups known as Marranos and Moriscos, both of whom were forced to become Conversos. This event included a ritual in which the guilty party was read their sentence known as an auto de fe. One prominent leader of this event, who supported the Alhambra Decree calling for the expulsion of (*) Jews in 1492, was Tomas de Torquemada. For 10 points, name this tribunal of the Roman Catholic Church aimed at rooting out heretics that took place in an Iberian nation.", "Spanish Inquisition", "E"]
["On the eve of this holiday, some followers perform the kapporot (kah-pah-ROHT) ritual of swinging a chicken over their heads. The Al Cheit (ahl KHAYT) and Ashamnu (ah-SHAHM-noo) are two prayers of this holiday, which once included the pronunciation of the Tetragrammaton by the High Priest. It closes with the Ne'ila (neh-EE-lah) service and includes the Aramaic (*) Kol Nidre (KOHL nee-DRAY) prayer. Requiring a twenty-five hour fast, it occurs on the tenth of Tishrei, five days before Sukkot (soo-KOHT) and about nine days after Rosh Hashana. For 10 points, name this Jewish day of atonement.", "Yom Kippur", "E"]
["Sicilians wrote an enemy's name on, then buried, one of these objects in the belief that doing so would kill that enemy. Ludwig Feuerbach lamented that this kind of blood \"can make no revolution.\" According to superstition, stealing one of these objects is supposed to cure rheumatism. Like other members of this nightshade family, this foodstuff produces the toxin (*) solanine when stored long enough in light to turn green. A toy based on it includes holes for eyes, ears, nose, mouth, and feet. For 10 points, name this vegetable that is often served mashed or baked.", "Potato", "E"]
["Several families of rockets have been named for this event, whose initial failures were due to Otto Braun's poor planning and the printing presses and typewriters included as essential equipment. Following the destruction of the (*) Jiangxi (jang-SHEE) Soviet, this event allowed the survivors to set up a base at Yanan, which was separated from Jiangxi by eighteen mountain ranges, twenty-four rivers, and a total of six thousand miles. For 10 points, identify this mass migration that concluded in 1936 with Mao Zedong leading a newly secure Chinese Communist Party.", "Long March", "E"]
["This figure responds to Adonijah's request to marry Abishag by having him murdered. According to Jewish tradition, this Biblical figure wrote the Book of Proverbs. On the advice of Nathan, this son of Bathsheba was anointed king. He traded for cedar from Lebanon to build the first (*) Temple, and resolved a dispute between two women both claiming to be a baby's mother by ordering the baby to be cut in half. For 10 points, name this son of David, a legendarily wealthy and wise Jewish king.", "Solomon", "E"]
["The traditional date for this man's life was calculated as 258 years before Alexander the Great. His daughter married Jamasp, a minister of King Vishtaspa, whom this man had converted after curing his favorite horse. He authored a series of hymns called the gathas, which are now part of a holy book called the Avesta. He preached that Vohu Mana was one of the six Amesha Spentas and that the evil Angra Mainyu waged constant war on the good (*) Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this founder of a namesake dualistic Persian religion.", "Zoroaster", "E"]
["When this man stopped at a well at Midian, he so impressed Hobab by his defense of a group of seven shepherdesses that he received Hobab's daughter Zipporah in marriage. This man's grandfather was Levi, and his parents were Amram and Jochebed. As a baby, he was placed in a basket of reeds and sent to the care of an (*) Egyptian woman because it had been decreed that all Hebrew male children were to be drowned in the Nile River, as related in the book of exodus. For 10 points, name this Biblical figure who parted the Red Sea.", "Moses", "E"]
["This group set up communities at Niskeyuna and New Lebanon, the latter of which came to prominence under the leadership of Joseph Meacham and Lucy Wright. Those leaders promoted the idea of separate living quarters for men and women, increasing this group's focus on celibacy. Following the teachings of (*) \"Mother\" Ann Lee, this group currently consists of only a few living members living at Sabbath Day Lake, Maine. For 10 points, name this Protestant denomination, an offshoot of the Quakers whose members often actively move during prayer.", "Shakers", "E"]
["In one incident in this book, Coriantumr (kuh-RYE-an-toom-urr) decapitates Shiz, who continues to stand up and struggle for breath for several moments afterwards. Other episodes in this text include the emigration of the \"brother of Jared\" and the war between the Nephites and the Lamanites. The same organization that follows this text believes that in 1830, a man used a pair of glasses, called Urim and Thummim, to decode this work from (*) gold plates buried in the ground. For 10 points, identify this central book of a Christian denomination founded by Joseph Smith.", "Book of Mormon", "E"]
["One leader of this religion was responsible for the building of the Harimandir, the holiest of this religion's gurdwaras. Another leader of this religion set up a community of initiates within the religion known as Khalsa. Members of that group in this religion must wear long hair, a comb, and dagger as part of the five K's. This religion's leaders have included (*) Nanak and Gobind Singh, who were two of the ten human gurus. For 10 points, name this Indian religion whose scripture is the Adi Granth and whose Golden Temple is found in Amritsar.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["The event celebrated in this holiday fulfilled the prophecy made in Joel 2:28-29. On this holiday, churchgoers wear red clothing, and roses are sometimes scattered from the ceiling. Celebrated on Whitsunday, this holiday commemorates an event in which 3,000 people were baptized after tongues of (*) flame appeared over the apostles' heads, allowing them to speak in tongues. For 10 points, name this festival celebrated fifty days after Easter.", "Pentecost", "E"]
["According to Pliny, Zoroaster lived on this food while in the wilderness. Varieties of this food from China include Rushan and Rubing. The term \"Friulano\" is exclusively used in Canada for one type of this food, other types of which include the Norwegian gjetost and the French chevre. It is created using the enzyme rennet, which causes the coagulation of (*) casein, a protein found in milk. For 10 points, name this food whose varieties include Stilton and Gouda.", "Cheese", "E"]
["The citizens of a certain town cover their heads with sackcloths upon hearing what this person has to say, and that person gets upset after a plant that has sprung up overnight is destroyed by a worm. His companions decide to cast lots to find who is responsible for a storm while they are at (*) sea, and this son of Amittai flees to Tarshish and Joppa at the beginning of his namesake book. For 10 points, name this prophet who, after refusing to go to Ninevah, was swallowed by a giant whale.", "Jonah", "E"]
["In 215 AD, the emperor Caracalla ordered a massacre of the youth of this city after being ridiculed in some satires. This city was designed by Dinocrates and constructed by Cleomenes of Naucratis. The Septuagint was translated here. Mark Antony declared Caesarion King of Kings in a set of donations named for this city. The (*) Arian heresy originated in this city. Its island of Pharos is home to a namesake lighthouse and it was the site of the greatest library in the ancient world. For 10 points, name this Egyptian city founded by and named for Alexander the Great.", "Alexandria", "E"]
["A rite of this religion sees a kannushi bless the groundbreaking ceremonies of buildings. After receiving an unfavorable fortune at a temple for this religion, tradition mandates tying the fortune to a tree or fence at that jinja. One festival of this religion symbolizing death and rebirth centers around rebuilding a temple every (*) twenty years. This religion became its home country's official state religion during the Meiji period. For 10 points, name this animistic Japanese religion that reveres kami.", "Shinto", "E"]
["During this holiday, food is eaten off of a straw mat called a mkeka (um-KAY-kah). Gifts called zawadi (zah-WAH-dee) are given out on this holiday. Those celebrating this festival use a candle-holder with seven spaces, representing the Seven Principles. Inspired by the tradition of the (*) \"first fruit\" celebration, Dr. Maulana Karenga (maw-LAH-nah kah-REHN-guh) instituted this holiday in 1966. For 10 points, name this holiday, which lasts from December 26 to January 1st and celebrates the African harvest.", "Kwanzaa", "E"]
["The translations provided for Aramaic phrases in this book indicate its probably non-Jewish audience. Some manuscripts of this book omit the final eleven verses, which include \"they will pick up snakes with their hands; and when they drink deadly poison, it will not hurt them at all.\" This book contains no direct quotes from Jesus proclaiming himself the Messiah, instead using the term \"son of man.\" It was the first Gospel to be (*) written and became the source for the other two synoptic gospels, Matthew and Luke. For 10 points, name this traditional second book of the New Testament.", "Gospel of Mark", "E"]
["One of these figures founded the Masand group of representatives and was the first to collect a tithe to fund the Langar communal kitchens. Another one of these figures wrote the Lanwan marriage hymn. The last one of these established the five (*) Ks and was succeeded by a book compiled the fifth one of these, who was named Arjan Dev. The first one of these leaders wrote most of that book, the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this group of nine men, including Nanak, the spiritual leaders of Sikhism.", "Sikh gurus", "E"]
["Elihu bemoans the attitude of the friends of this man. Those three friends blame this man's misfortunes as being the fault of this man, but they cannot find what that fault may be. This man's misfortunes begin after the Devil tries to convince God that this man is only (*) pious because of his good fortune. The story of this man is an explanation of why bad things happen to good people. For 10 points, name this man who remains faithful to God despite all the tests he is put to in a namesake book of the Old Testament.", "Job", "E"]
["This figure's birthday is celebrated on the 8th of the 4th month of Chinese lunar calendar, and many of the myths surrounding his birth are collected in the Jataka tales. This figure delivered his first sermon in the Deer Park at Benares. His witnessing of the Four Sights and his meditation under the (*) Bodhi tree led him to the Four Noble Truths. For 10 points, name this founder of Indian religion with Theravadan and Mahayanan sects, also known as Siddhartha Guatama.", "Devadatta", "E"]
["The Alhambra Decree affected certain members of this group, which geography divides into the Ashkenazi and the Sephardi. This group was subject to the blood libel, which was responsible for several pogroms against it. The most notable action against this group saw the attack of (*) Kristallnacht and deportation of members of this group to places such as Dachau and Auschwitz. For 10 points, name this religious group persecuted during both the Spanish Inqusition and the Holocaust.", "History of the Jews in Europe", "E"]
["The Limbourg brothers created a decorative one of these for the Duc de Berry. The one used in Baha'i is divided into 19 subunits while the one used by Hindus is divided into tithi. One of these introduced during the French Revolution contained a division known as Thermidor. The (*) Jewish one contains such divisions as Kislev and Tishrei while the Muslim one, based off of lunar cycles, contains such divisions as Ramadan. For 10 points, name this system that have Julian and Gregorian variants in the western world and which are typically divided into 12 months.", "Calendar", "E"]
["This group grew out of the Bible Students movement, and adopted their current name in 1931 under Joseph Rutherford. This group's founder preached that Christ returned to the earth in 1874, and that the \"Gentile Times\" would end in 1914. Founded by Charles Taze Russell, they practice disfellowship, or shunning, and believe that exactly (*) 144,000 people will be allowed into heaven after Armageddon. For 10 points, name this Christian sect which publishes The Watchtower and refuses blood transfusions.", "Jehovah's Witnesses", "E"]
["The Baltimore convention which brought this denomination to America adopted the Twenty-Five Articles of Religion written by its founder. In 1968, this church was created in its current form by a merger with the Evangelical United Brethren. This denomination's services often use hymns written by its founder's brother Charles, and its other influential figures included the Great Awakening preacher George Whitefield. It was founded in the 1730s from within the Church of England and named because of its ordered (*) system of Bible study. For 10 points, name this Protestant denomination which is affiliated with Wesleyan colleges.", "Methodism", "E"]
["A driving force in the creation of this sect was Gerald Brousseau Gardner. One of its central beliefs is a namesake \"Rede\" which states \"If it harm none, do what you will.\" Alexander Sanders started this religion's \"Dianic\" branch, and most of its practitioners worship a male deity termed the \"Horned God.\" Adherents to this faith worship a (*) female deity usually called \"the Goddess\" in small groups called \"covens.\" For 10 points, name this Neopagan movement whose practitioners are often called witches.", "Wicca", "E"]
["The book in which this character appears has a story about a goat with a single horn that is replaced by four smaller horns. This character insists on consuming nothing but vegetables and water after refusing the king's meat. Gabriel interrupts this man after he makes the prediction that the time of captivity for his people will be seventy weeks. In one incident, this character goes to the feast of (*) Belshazzar to interpret the writing on the wall. For 10 points, name this Bible character known for interpreting dreams who was thrown into the lion's den.", "Daniel", "E"]
["One of these entities is a son of Anu named Teshub. In addition to being a god of death, the Aztec deity Xolotl (show-LOT-ul) is depicted as a god of this type. Another example of one of these figures is a deity in Hindu mythology who was cursed by Gautama and was named Indra. One of these figures battles with the serpent (*) Jormungandr (YOUR-mun-gone-dur) and is the possessor of the hammer Mjolnir (MYOL-neer). For 10 points, name this type of god that includes the Norse god Thor.", "Gods of Thunder: A Norwegian Tribute to Kiss", "E"]
["The Kebra Nagast says this Biblical figure was the male progenitor of a line that ended in the reign of Haile Selassie. One of this figure's books contains the line \"Please, catch for us the foxes in the vineyard\" \"the little foxes.\" The seven hundred wives of this figure \"turned his heart after other gods,\" except for Naamah. This figure was the last ruler of a united Israel, wrote (*) Ecclesiastes and Song of Songs, and was visited by the Queen of Sheba. For 10 points, name this wise ruler of Israel, the son of David.", "Solomon", "M"]
["One of this religion's \"Celestial Masters\" led the Five Pecks of Rice rebellion. It believes in a Jade Emperor ruling over heaven, and in a principle of \"doing without doing\" or \"wu-wei.\" Its founder was stopped at the western gate by Yinxi (YIN-shee), and compelled to write down the central text of this religion. For 10 points, name this Chinese religion founded by Laozi (LOWT-zee), which seeks accordance with \"the way.\"", "Taoism", "M"]
["Roper v. Simmons established age limits for this practice. In one case concerning it, a 5-4 majority found it \"wantonly and freakishly imposed\" after a writ of certiorari (sur-shee-uh-RAIR-ree) was granted to a defendant named Furman. After that case was overturned by Gregg v. Georgia, this practice was applied to Gary Gilmore. For 10 points, name this practice by which chairs named Old Sparky or lethal injections are used to end the lives of convicted murderers.", "Capital punishment", "M"]
["The Kebra Nagast maintains that this Biblical figure was the male progenitor of the line that would eventually culminate in the reign of Haile Selassie. One of this figure's books contains the line \"Please, catch for us the foxes in the vineyard... the little foxes.\" According to scripture, the seven hundred wives of this figure \"turned his heart after other gods,\" except for Naamah. This figure was the last ruler of a united Israel, wrote Ecclesiastes and Song of Songs, and was visited by the Queen of Sheba. For 10 points, identify this wise ruler of Israel, the son of David.", "Solomon", "M"]
["Members of this religion believe in a messiah called the Mahdi. Converting to this religion only requires reciting the shahada. This religion's believers pray five times a day while facing qibla. Its two main branches are Sunni and Shi'a, and its members make annual pilgrimages to Mecca. For 10 points, name this religion that follows the Quran, which was dictated by its founder, Muhammad.", "Islam", "M"]
["This work's welfth chapter discusses the use of fire and other environmental factors. The 1910 translation of this book discusses the \"nine situations,\" the use of spies, the laying of plans, and marching and maneuvering. This book was written during the Spring and Autumn Period and has been applied by Douglas MacArthur and Mao Zedong. For 10 points, name this Chinese text written by Sun Tzu (soo) as a manual for the leaders of armies.", "The Art of War", "M"]
["She appears in the Old Testament books of First and Second Kings as the wife of King Ahab of Israel and an ardent worshiper of Baal. She acquired Naboth's vineyard for her husband by plotting to have Naboth executed, an act which prompted the prophet Elijah to predict that dogs would eat her corpse. She was killed when her servants pushed her from a window as she stood awaiting an invading army. Name this Biblical figure whose name became synonymous with evil and an insult to women.", "Jezebel", "M"]
["In 1964, Pope Paul VI returned this figure's supposed head to Patrai as a symbol of goodwill towards Greek Christians. In the Gospel of John, he is the first Apostle named, and the Konigsberg Chronicle states that this man erected a cross in Kiev and proclaimed that it would be a great city. Along with his brother Peter, this man was called to be a fisher of men, and he is the patron saint of Russia. For 10 points, name this figure who was supposedly crucified on the X-shaped cross that bears his name and is depicted on the flag of Scotland.", "Andrew the Apostle", "M"]
["One branch of this religion that includes the concept of sunyata, or emptiness, follows a set of scriptures known as the \"three baskets\", and its Four Noble Truths claim that life is suffering. Devotees attempt to follow the Middle Way and the Eightfold Path. It is divided into Theravada and Mahayana branches, the latter of which emphasizes bodhisattvas, as well as including the Japanese Zen tradition. For 10 points, name this religion in which adherents attempt to break the cycle of samsara and achieve nirvana.", "Buddhism", "M"]
["This Biblical figure gained his name when, at his birth, his mother said \"I have possessed a man by the favour of the Lord.\" This man founded the city of Enoch, which he named after his son. He bore a special mark on his forehead, \"lest any finding him should kill him,\" and was banished to the Land of Nod. After performing his best-known action, this figure asked, \"Am I my brother's keeper?\" For 10 points, name this Old Testament son of Adam who killed his brother Abel.", "Cain and Abel", "M"]
["Jesus responded to one this man at the Last Supper by saying \"I am the way and the truth and the life.\" This grandson of Alpheus and son of James was possibly killed by four guards with spears during his ministry in India. The patron saint of architects, this brother of Matthew is sometimes called Didymus, meaning \"twin,\" but he is better known for proclaim \"My Lord and my God\" after examining the wounds of Jesus. For 10 points, name this apostle best remembered for doubting the resurrection of Jesus Christ.", "Thomas the Apostle", "M"]
["The Druze believe that all of the Jewish type of this person were really the same person, while the Baha'i faith holds that Baha'ullah was the last of this type of person. In the Mormon Church, Joseph Smith became one of these people after being baptized, and had earlier heard the voices of Malachi, Joel, and Isaiah, three Jewish people of this type. The shahadah, or Islamic confession of faith, states that Muhammad is this type of person in relation to Allah. For 10 points, name these religious figures who claim to pass on to their followers the Word of God.", "Prophet", "M"]
["In this myth system, a sword named Kusanagi is used by a deity who is born when another deity washes himself upon returning from the underworld. Another deity born from that event was created from Izanagi's left eye, and has a brother named Tsukuyomi; that deity is the sun goddess Amaterasu. For 10 points, name this myth system whose worshippers revere spirits called kami, the traditional religion of Japan.", "Shinto", "M"]
["Primo Levi wrote about his time in one of these places in his memoir If This is a Man. In a novel by William Styron, Sophie Zawistowska is forced to choose which of her children will die at one of these places. A book describing the conditions of these places is narrated by Eliezer, who loses his faith in God because of their inhumanity before being liberated by the American army at Buchenwald. Described by Elie Wiesel in Night, for 10 points, name these places, such as Auschwitz, where Nazis killed millions of Jews during World War II.", "Internment", "M"]
["It is especially high for the owners of mines, while for the owners of farms it is higher for irrigated lands rather than lands that are watered by rainfall. It is also imposed on owners of more than thirty cows or buffalo or owners of more than five camels. Descendants of Muhammad are ineligible to receive it, and the usual rate charged is two and a half percent. Known as \"zakat,\" for 10 points, name this pillar of Islam that involves charitable donations.", "Alms", "M"]
["This man's wife laughs when told she will bear a son and is buried in the Cave of the Patriarchs. This son of Terah forces his servant to wander in the desert until she is saved by the appearance of a magical well. This man lies with Hagar in response to his wife's barrenness. He is told his descendants will be as numerous as the sand and the stars. This man is stopped from sacrificing his son Isaac by the last minute appearance of a sheep. For 10 points, name this patriarch important to Christianity, Judaism, and Islam.", "Abraham", "M"]
["In Malagasy mythology, this distinction belongs to a man named Andriambahomanana. According to the Bhagavad Gita, this role is filled by Manu. In Norse mythology, this distinction belongs to two people who were created from trees by Odin and his brothers, Ask and Embla. More famously, this role is filled by a man whose first wife is Lilith according to Jewish tradition. For 10 points, name this role which, in Christianity, is filled by Adam and Eve.", "First man or woman", "M"]
["This book features a character called Clopas, who encounters the risen Jesus. This book tells of a Pharisee who tells God how much more righteous he is than a nearby tax collector. This Gospel is addressed the Theophilus (thee-OF-uh-luhs) and contains the parables of the rich man Lazarus, the Prodigal Son, and the Good Samaritan. Attributed to the author of Acts of the Apostles, it and Matthew draw on the \"Q Source\" as well as Mark. For 10 points, name this synoptic gospel of the New Testament that precedes John.", "Gospel of Luke", "M"]
["Before a key battle, this man asked his opponent, \"Am I a dog that you come to fight me with a stick?\" This figure's mother, Orpah, gave birth to this man and his three brothers after she shed four tears. Born in Gath, this figure challenged the enemy camp every morning and night for forty days while they recited the Sh'ma. This figure's opponent refused to wear Saul's heavy armor, instead killing this man with a sling and pebble. For 10 points, name this nine-foot Philistine slain by David.", "Goliath", "M"]
["This man's sins included fathering a son, Adeodatus, on a concubine. This figure converted from Manichaeism to Christianity at the hands of St. Ambrose of Milan. A moralizing influence in this man's life was his mother, Monica. In one work, this man used the Sack of Rome to demonstrate man's damnation by Original Sin. For 10 points, name this saint from Hippo who wrote the Confessions and the City of God.", "Augustine of Hippo", "M"]
["Oliver Cowdery was a leader of this movement, whose Nauvoo legion perpetrated the Mountain Meadows Massacre. Martin Van Buren rejected the plea of their leader to overturn the Extermination Order that had been issued against them in Missouri. Their 1850s \"War\" with the U.S. is sometimes called Buchanan's Blunder and came after they were driven from Illinois. 1844 saw the death of their founder, Joseph Smith. For 10 points, name this religious group brought by Brigham Young to Salt Lake City, Utah.", "Mormons", "M"]
["This man named a place where he received a vision Bethel, and he sought refuge at Haran after fleeing his brother. This man worked for his uncle Laban for seven years to gain the hand of Rachel and then worked another seven years to gain the hand of Leah. This man reunited with his son Joseph in Egypt years after this man believed Joseph to be dead. For 10 points, name this Hebrew patriarch who envisioned his namesake ladder to heaven.", "Jacob", "M"]
["This prophet, the son of Amittai, caused an entire city to fast and wear sackcloth, and at the end of his namesake book he becomes angry when a worm destroys a plant that was providing him shade. After boarding a ship in Joppa, God created a great storm, which prompts the other passengers to throw this prophet into the sea. Earlier, he had purposely disobeyed God's wishes by not going to the sinful city of Ninevah (NIN-ee-vuh). For 10 points, name this prophet of the Old Testament who was swallowed by a large fish.", "Jonah", "M"]
["This man claimed to have thrown his Olympic gold medal into the Ohio River to protest the refusal of a \"whites-only\" restaurant to serve him. He was barred from competing from 1967 to 1970 after objecting to register for the draft, claiming \"I ain't got no quarrel with the Viet Cong\". After his return this convert to the Nation of Islam would regain the heavyweight title against Joe Frazier in \"The Fight Of The Century\". For 10 points, name this boxer who boasted he could \"float like a butterfly, sting like a bee\", born Cassius Clay and nicknamed \"The Greatest\".", "Muhammad Ali", "M"]
["A festival that is repeatedly celebrated during this period commonly involves apricots and sweet milk and is known as the iftar. The twenty-seventh day of this timeframe is known for the ability to multiply merit and is called the Night of Power. This period ends with the coming of Shawwal and the Eid al-Fitr celebration. The pillar of sawm is practiced during this month and includes refraining from impure thoughts as well as food and drink. For 10 points, identify this month of daytime fasting in Islam.", "Ramadan", "M"]
["Its second period was dominated by Diego Lainez, and its third session was influenced by Charles Borromeo. This event excluded the Prayer of Manasseh and the Third and Fourth Books of the Maccabees as canon but declared most of the Vulgate as canon. Its first session accepted the Nicene Creed as the basis of Christian faith and rejected justification by faith alone. It was convened by Paul III in 1545. For 10 points, name this council of the Catholic Church that sparked the Counter Reformation.", "Council of Trent", "M"]
["This practice was forbidden by the First Council of Braga due to association with the Priscilliantists, but Rastafarian I-tal is generally considered to mandate this practice. A passage in Isaiah claims that lions will adopt this practice, and some claim they did in the Garden of Eden. This practice is widespread among Hindu sects such as Vaishnava (VAISH-nuh-vuh) and Bhakti Yoga (BAK-tee), and all Jains follow this practice due to their concept of ahimsa, or nonviolence towards all living things. For 10 points, name this practice encouraged by many religions, in which one does not eat meat.", "Vegetarianism", "M"]
["In this language, the plural of feminine nouns is formed by adding \"-aat\" to the ending. Yes or no questions in this language are constructed by putting the word \"hal\" in front of the sentence. This language's alphabet has 28 letters and is written in cursive, from left to right; the first three letters of that alphabet are \"alef,\" \"baa,\" and \"taa.\" The English word \"algebra\" comes from this Semitic language. For 10 points, name this language of the Q'uran.", "Arabic", "M"]
["This religion's communities set up training institutes for their members, which often base their curriculum on the seven Ruhi books. The founder of this religion wrote as one of his last works the Epistle to the Son of the Wolf. This faith has a legislative body of nine members in Haifa at the Universal House of Justice. Its calendar has four intercalary days in addition to its nineteen months made up of nineteen days. The founder of this religion was a follower of the Bab and took up the name Baha'u'llah. For 10 points, name this inclusive faith started in nineteenth century Persia.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["During one battle, Hur helped to hold this man's hands in the air so that his people would prevail. This man went to the top of Mount Nebo to die after singing a song. This man and his older brother were punished for showing impatience when he was instructed to speak to a rock, but struck the rock instead to produce water. This husband of Zipporah spoke with the burning bush, brought the Ten Commandments down from Mount Sinai, and led the Israelites out of Egypt. For 10 points, name prophet who parted the Red Sea.", "Moses", "M"]
["The Blue Cliff Record is a text of this school, which was brought to China in the 500s by Bodhinharma (bode-HEEN-harm-uh) and to the west in the 1900s by D.T. Suzuki. The Soto sect emphasizes seated meditation called zazen, while the Rinzai sect uses paradoxical riddles called koans. Descended from Mahayana sources, it is widespread in Japan and stresses the importance of wisdom in gaining enlightenment. For 10 points, name this school of Buddhism whose name is associated with calmness.", "Zen", "M"]
["This was the book John Wesley was reading when he felt his heart \"strangely warmed.\" The writer of this book states that \"neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor rulers, nor things present, nor things to come\" can separate us from the love of God. This book questions \"if God is for us, who is against us?\" and states that \"the wages of sin is death.\" This book is found after Acts and is the first and longest of the Pauline Epistles. For 10 points, name this letter written to the church of a large Italian city.", "Charles Terrot", "M"]
["This organization received proceeds from drug-running at Lintin Island until a crackdown under Lin Zexu sparked a war. This company exacerbated an event by using farmland to cultivate opium, causing the Great Bengal Famine. Several officials of this organization were in the Black Hole of Calcutta after one of its leaders won the Battle of Plassey. Initially the rival of a similar company called the VOC, this organization ceded control of its namesake region to Victoria in 1858. For 10 points, name this English trading company that dealt in opium and tea in China and India.", "East India Company", "M"]
["The death of the fifth of these figures was kept secret for fifteen years to allow for the construction of their official home, the Potala Palace. These figures are discovered by monks who are dispatched to see if children can recognize the objects of their predecessor. They are considered to be manifestations of the bodhisattva Avalokitesvara (AV-ah-loh-kit-ehs-VAH-ra). The fourteenth and current one is known as Tenzin Gyatso and was exiled from Lhassa to India. For 10 points, name this spiritual leaders of Tibetan Buddhism.", "Dalai Lama", "M"]
["In the Berlin and Kay model, this is the seventh color term that emerges in an evolving language, immediately after \"blue.\" In Czech, objects of this color are described as \"hnedy\" and in Mandarin, this English word is \"bulang.\" It is \"khoom\" in Hebrew and \"ghahve ee\" in Persian. In French, this English word is \"chatain\" when describing hair but \"marron\" in most other situations. In English, this color can refer to certain \"shirts\" worn by Nazis or to astronomical objects intermediate in size between planets and stars. For 10 points, identify this color that sugar acquires when mixed with molasses.", "Brown", "M"]
["Along with John, this figure cured the lame man at the Beautiful Gate, and he judged Ananias and Sapphira after they tried to deceive the Apostles. He was imprisoned in Jerusalem by Herod, and once judged the magician Simon Magus. His brother Andrew was also an Apostle, and this figure was the only Apostle Christ appeared to on the first day after the Resurrection. He was crucified in Rome upside down, and his name means \"the rock.\" The holder of the keys to heaven, he denied knowing Jesus three times. For 10 points, name this first Pope called a \"fisher of men.\"", "Simon the Zealot", "M"]
["According to this religion, the hero Yima was killed by the serpent Azi Dahaka. Adherents of this faith believe that the demon Vizaresh drags the evil souls into the House of Lies at the Chinvat Bridge. An important concept in this religion is the contrast between asha and druj, or truth and lies. Gayomart is the first human-being according to this religion, whose dead followers are left exposed in Towers of Silence. This religion follows the Zend-Avesta and centers on the struggle between Ahriman and Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this dualistic Persian religion.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["God once instructed this figure to put his hand in his chest, causing it to become white as snow. This younger son of Amram threw a tree into the water of Marah in order to make it drinkable, and he aided the seven daughters of the shepherd Jethro in Midian. This brother of Miriam once brought forth water by striking a rock with his staff, and he killed an Egyptian overseer for beating a slave. The brother of Aaron, he once saw God in the guise of a burning bush. For 10 points, name this figure who led the Israelites out of Egypt and received the Ten Commandments.", "Moses", "M"]
["The title of one important text in this religion is translated as \"Record of Ancient Matters.\" Children participate in a festival at ages three, five, and seven as a rite of passage in this faith. Another important concept in this religion is the possession of a true heart, and deities live on the Plain of High Heaven. In this religion, spirits possess the power of creation, known as musubi, and shrines in this religion have torii at their entrances. Adherents of this religion worship spirits of nature known as kami. For 10 points, name this indigenous religion of Japan.", "Shinto", "M"]
["In this religion, those who have conquered their internal passions are known as jina. This religion believes that every living being has the potential to become God, and its followers advocate an important prayer known as the Namokar Mantra. The issue of whether nudity is required differentiates the two major sects of this religion, the Digambaras and Svetambaras. This religion's leaders include the twenty-four \"bridge-makers,\" or Tirthankaras. Some of its adherents wear masks to avoid inhaling and killing insects so as to follow the doctrine of ahimsa, or nonviolence. For 10 points, name this Indian religion founded by Mahavira.", "Jainism", "M"]
["One section of this book describes a wall made of jasper and decorated with precious stones. The narrator addresses the seven churches of Asia in the second and third chapters of this work, and a voice can be heard saying \"I am the alpha and the omega.\" In this book's eighth and the ninth books, the trumpeting of an angel destroys a third of the world. Jesus is described as the \"Word of God\" in this book, and it involves the opening of the seven seals and the Whore of Babylon. For 10 points, name this book of the Bible about the apocalypse, written by John of Patmos.", "Book of Revelation", "M"]
["This holiday occurs on the day before the Fast of Gedaliah, and it is believed to be the day on which God inscribes one's fate into the Book of Life. Its observers metaphorically cast off their sins into a body of water in a ritual known as tashlikh. Apples dipped in honey are consumed during this holiday, which begins the Days of Awe. A ram's horn called the shofar is blown to satisfy the commandment of making T'ruah, and it incorporates the greeting \"shana tova.\" For 10 points, name this holiday occurring at the beginning of Tishrei, the Jewish New Year.", "Rosh Hashanah", "M"]
["A faction of this faith, Lapsarianism, believes that the Fall of Man was planned by God. This religion believes in the doctrine of the perseverance of saints, known as \"once saved, always saved\". It believes in parts of Common Grace, which is the belief that God gives undeserved gifts to all humans, and this religion also follows the doctrine of Irresistible Grace. It rejects the idea of transubstantiation, and believes that the Eucharist is purely symbolic. For 10 points, name this branch of Christianity whose namesake founder outlined the concepts of predestination, the elect and total depravity in this denomination's founding work, Institutes of the Christian Religion.", "Calvinism", "M"]
["One of sect of this school of thought emphasizes the shikantaza practice, and one important practice in this school of thought is kensho. Its branches include Obaku, while another of its branches was founded by Dogen. Texts important to this religion include the Blue Cliff Record and The Gateless Gate, and its origin can be traced back to the Flower Sermon. Its Soto and Rinzai sects differ on the emphasis over meditation on koans. For 10 points, name this branch of Mahayana Buddhism commonly practiced in Japan.", "Zen", "H"]
["12.\tThe 2nd-century saint Irenaeus tells of how this man flees from a public bath house upon the arrival of Cerinthus. This man addressed one work to Kyria, usually translated as \"the elect lady,\" and her children; his namesake \"Comma\" is a Trinitarian phrase which first appeared in Bibles of the eighth century CE. His longest book features the Pharisee Nicodemus. Other scenes specific to that book by him include the marriage at Cana, in which the changing of water to wine occurs, and the raising of Lazarus from the dead. The first line of that book contains the Greek word logos, and is often translated \"In the beginning was the Word.\" For 10 points, name this author sometimes conflated with a namesake who wrote the Book of Revelation on Patmos, and wrote the non-synoptic fourth Gospel.", "John the Evangelist", "H"]
["The Hebrew scriptures mention practitioners of this activity, referring to them as qodesh and qedushah depending on their gender. This activity is the main purview of religious figures known as devadasis, who are supposed to adopt their replacements and who are considered the personifications of Jagganatha's wife Lakshmi. In Greek religion, this activity was called hierodouleia, which translates as \"sacred service.\" A third-gender Indian group which is often coerced into this non-dance practice are devotees of the goddess Bahuchara Mata known as hijra. Its older practitioners were the ishtaritu, or female servants of the goddess Ishtar, who did this to the king to demonstrate the fertility of the land. For 10 points, identify this widespread cultic practice which involves providing sexual services to worshippers.", "Sacred prostitution", "H"]
["[NOTE FOR MODERATOR TO READ TO HIM/HERSELF: if your religious beliefs prohibit you from saying \"Yahweh,\" you may skip the text between the two asterisks. Otherwise, read this question as written.] In the medieval Jewish satire Toledot Yeshu, an \"Ineffable\" one of these is stolen by Jesus which grants him his powers. The Mt. Athos-based imiaslavie group believed that one of these words is equivalent to its referent. Hildegard of Bingen used the word Aigonz as one of these in her constructed language, the Lingua Ignota. The Islamic ritual prayer dhikr involves frequent repetition of them. Muslims believe the Quranic text contains at least ninety-nine of them. Many different ones come from pronunciations of yud-hey-vav-hey, the Hebrew letters of the Tetragrammaton, * one example being Yahweh. * For 10 points, name these religious words or phrases that are \"hallowed\" in the Lord's Prayer.", "Names of God", "H"]
["At one point, this holiday included the Hakhel ceremony, during which Jews would make a pilgrimage to hear the king of Israel recite the Torah. Services during or immediately following this holiday involve the reading of Kohelet, or Ecclesiastes. The five middle days of this holiday are called Chol HaMo'ed. The last day of this holiday features seven processions and is known as Hosha'nah Rabbah. This holiday's distinctive features include the carrying of four plants: aravot, hadassim, etrog, and lulav. The day after it is alternately known as either Shemini 'Atseret or Simhat Torah. For 10 points, identify this Jewish harvest festival occurring on the 15th of Tishri, five days after Yom Kippur, during which worshippers remind themselves of the Exodus by dwelling in outdoor booths.", "Sukkot", "H"]
["One side of this terrestrial object is aligned spatially with the rising of the bright star Canopus. A golden water spout was added to jut out two feet at the top of a different side to the northwest of it. This object, which is cleaned twice yearly using brooms dipped in rosewater, has a semicircular stone barrier along one edge. Its parts include a section called the Multazam and a cloth which is replaced every year called the Kiswah. The Tawaf ritual involves this object. Its southeastern corner is inlaid with a silver frame containing object said to have fallen to earth during the time of Adam, the Black Stone. It is found in the center of the Masjid-al-Haram's gigantic courtyard. For 10 points, name this shrine circled seven times during the hajj, a black boxlike shrine in Mecca which is the holiest site in Islam.", "Hajj", "H"]
["The Hesychast monk Gregory Palamas preached of an uncreated example of this thing at Tabor that represented divinity. An ayah named for this thing in Sura 24 of the Qur'an extols Allah's drawing of parables for mankind and describes the contents of a niche. Since the first of three creations, a \"world of\" this thing existed to which the souls of the elect pass according to Manichaeism, which believes this thing is trapped in human bodies. Its Hebrew plural form names an object grouped with \"thummim\" which Jewish high priests used for divination. George Fox believed each person experiences God using an \"inner\" one attested to by Quakers. According to the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus is this thing \"of the world\". For 10 points, name this first thing which God let there be in the book of Genesis.", "Lights (musician)", "H"]
["One text named for this practice features Ajatashatru's attempt to starve king Bimbisara as a frame narrative and uses the setting sun as the first of thirteen images of the Pure Land. In some traditions, a form of this practice called nididhyasana must follow after reading Vedanta texts. The nature of breathing is described in a sutra named for a form of this practice called Anapanasati. In some Hindu traditions, a form of this called dh\u0101ra\u1e47\u0101 leads to the state of dhyan\u0101, which is also attested in the Pali Canon. The three \"marks of existence\" are noticed in the vipassana form. Dogen, a Japanese monk, wrote a treatise on a form of it known as zazen in which the practitioner is seated. For 10 points, name this type of religious practice in which individuals concentrate on, sharpen, or empty their thoughts.", "Meditation", "H"]
["The Buddhist leader Zhuhong advocated against this practice and in opposition to it promoted the practice of fangsheng among his followers. Book 5, verse 55 of the Laws of Manu proscribes this practice, claiming that one who engages in it will have it done to him in the next life. In the Orphic cults, the prohibition on this practice indicated an attempt to atone for the Titans' murder of Dionysus and thereby make worshippers acceptable to Persephone. This practice was permitted to Noah and his descendants in Genesis 9:3. The followers of Pythagoras were prohibited from this practice out of protest for the ritual of sacrifice. For 10 points, identify this practice forbidden to Jains because of ahimsa as well as by a six hour-limitation after consuming dairy by kosher-keeping Jews, the ingestion of animal flesh.", "Meat", "H"]
["In one of this man's writings, the Soul of Mother Earth bewails her creation and asks for support from a \"strong and mighty king\" rather than a \"feeble man;\" he also calls out one of his enemies, the wicked man Bandva. He survived a trampling by horses and laughed in front of seven midwives as a newborn; at the behest of a divinity sharing its name with a plant, he was the first human to grind sacred haoma leaves. This man's healing of a black horse led to his conversion of King Vishtaspa. In some stories, this descendant of Spitama is murdered at age 77 while praying. He describes dead souls walking across the bridge Chinvat in the Gathas, which are now part of the Avesta. For 10 points, name this prophet who preached of the evil Ahriman's fight with Ahura Mazda in ancient Persia.", "Zoroaster", "H"]
["One man in this text has a vision of crowds clinging to a rod of iron, which leads them through a mist of darkness to a tree bearing bright white fruit. In another section of it, Coriantumr is found by the inhabitants of Zarahemla, whose chief judge is Alma. This work's narrative is preceded by testimony from the Three Witnesses and the distinct Eight Witnesses. In a battle near Cumorah hill in this text, the Lamanites wipe out a rival group of Lehi's descendants called the Nephites. It includes the abridged writings of the prophet Ether, whose ancestors, the Jaredites, fled from Babel using boats and settled in ancient America. For 10 points, name this book translated from golden plates by Joseph Smith at the angel Moroni [muh-ROE-nye]'s behest, a sacred writing of the Latter-Day Saints movement.", "Book of Mormon", "H"]
["Addai and Mari name a prayer used in a Syrian variant of this practice called the Holy Qurbana, and an 8th-century miracle in Lanciano, Italy allegedly occurred during this practice. Sections 7 and 8 of the Letter to the Smyrnaeans, by Ignatius of Antioch, defend this practice. In Eastern Orthodox churches, an anamnensis, and then the epiclesis, precede it in an anaphora prayer. More generally, it often involves the Words of Institution and a display stand called the monstrance. A rift developed at the Marburg Colloquy over whether this practice involves a \"real presence.\" For 10 points, name this sacrament which for Catholics involves transubstantiation, in which Christians partake of the body and blood of Christ in what was bread and wine.", "Eucharist", "H"]
["One of these figures has a white parrot for a disciple and rides a supernatural tiger from her execution to the underworld; that figure is among two of these who carry a wish-fulfilling jewel. The other jewel-carrier, Ksitigarbha, takes a vow to empty all hells. These beings are often said to have undergone ten bhumis. Shantideva wrote a text on their \"Way of Life\" in which he outlines the necessary six perfections that accompany their aim. These beings, who are instructed by the Lotus Sutra to use \"skillful means\" to ease suffering, include the compassionate Avalokiteshvara in the Mahayana tradition. A future one who waits until all hope has left the world to come is named Maitreya. For 10 points, name this group of godlike beings who stay behind in order to help others attain nirvana in Buddhism.", "Bodhisattva", "H"]
["This man was eventually kicked out of power by Vilinus after his brother-in-law Jonathan tried to gain popular support to take this man's position. In The Book of the Antiquities, this man was sacked by Vitellius who claimed this man was sending false information to the King of Petra about gold hidden at Talpiot. This man's family estate was uncovered in a 1990 archeological dig that found an Aramaic-engraved ossuary thought to belong to this man. Soldiers under this man's command hit a blindfolded prisoner and taunted him with \"Prophecy, who hit you?\" in Luke 22. In John 19, that prisoner is sent to this man's house by his fellow priest, Annas. For 10 points identify this High Priest of Israel who sent Jesus to Pontius Pilate to be put to death.", "Caiaphas", "H"]
["The origin of one part of this action is found in the fourth section of the an-Nissa surah. This action is considered the \"muftah al Jennah\" and is performed after the rise from the sujood of the last rak'ah. In one sect, performing this action is preceded by stating \"At-Tahiyyatu lillahi,\" while acknowledging the \"Wali\" of Allah is essential to the Shi'a version. One must meet the seven conditions of earnestness before meaningfully doing this. All humans are born with fitra associated with this action, so conservatives call people who perform it for the first time in front of another Muslim reverts rather than converts. For 10 points, name this pillar of Islam which is the declaration that there is no god but Allah.", "The origin of one part of this action is found in the fourth section of the an-Nissa surah. This action is considered the \"muftah al Jennah\" and is performed after the rise from the sujood of the last rak'ah. In one sect, performing this action is preceded by stating \"At-Tahiyyatu lillahi,\" while acknowledging the \"Wali\" of Allah is essential to the Shi'a version. One must meet the seven conditions of earnestness before meaningfully doing this. All humans are born with fitra associated with this action, so conservatives call people who perform it for the first time in front of another Muslim reverts rather than converts. For 10 points, name this pillar of Islam which is the declaration that there is no god but Allah.", "H"]
["The Surah ah-Nahl claims that the production of this substance is a sign of God \"for people who think\" and that is possesses healing powers. A monkey named Parileyyaka died of excitement and was reincarnated in the world of the devas after giving the Buddha some of this substance, an instance celebrated in Bangladesh during Madhu Purnima. This is one of the five substances that make up Panchamrita, the elixer of immortality. In Sikhism those who are baptized drink a mixture of water and sweets made of this substance dripped from a sword. While in the desert, John the Baptist survived eating locusts and this substance, which is also commonly eaten with apples on Rosh Hashanah. For 10 points, name this sweet liquid that was paired with milk in the biblical description of the Promised Land.", "Honey", "H"]
["An adherent of this faith from Connecticut wrote a series of 1916 Read-Aloud Plays about it and was named Horace Holley. Another leader of this religion was the architect William Sutherland Maxwell. One female member helped convert the Romanian Queen Marie, while another adherent, Leonora Armstrong, is regarded as this religion's \"Mother\" in Latin America. Martha Root was a member of this faith, whose other leaders wrote the historical narrative God Passes By and apologetic works like The Brilliant Proof and Making the Crooked Straight. People who promoted this faith carried out the Ten Year Crusade were called \"Hands of the Cause,\" the last surviving member was Ali-Muhammad Varqa. That crusade was ended after the construction of the Universal House of Justice in Haifa. For 10 points, name this religion once led by Shoghi Effendi and founded by Baha'u'llah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["This religious figure conceived of Hell as two vast frusta inside the earth and claimed that the atmosphere and outer space were divided into six zones, including the fortis et albus lucidusque aer and the aer tenuis. A major recurring image in this figure's thought is the concept of \"viriditas\", which literally translates as \"greenness\" but means something closer to \"fecundity\". Teachers of this figure include Jutta von Sponheim and the monk Volmar. This thinker theorized that the Devil was incapable of divine harmony, leading her to depict him grunting and yelling while battling against Virtue for control of Anima in her musical morality play Ordo Virtutum. That work is sometimes collected with her liturgical song cycle Symphony of the Harmony of Celestial Revelations, and also appears in her major collection of visions, Scivias. For 10 points, identify this never-fully-canonized mystic, visionary, and early composer, an abbess from Bingen.", "Hildegard of Bingen", "H"]
["In one appearance, nobody responds to this figure's knocking except a servant named Rhoda. In another appearance, this figure's speech enraged a crowd until Gamaliel calms them with the story of Judas the Galilean. He said \"Silver or gold I do not have\" to a man begging money at the temple gate called Beautiful. Galatians 2 describes a rebuke of this figure at Antioch for distancing himself from Gentile coverts. After being offered money, he proclaims \"May your money perish with you!\" to a Samaritan sorcerer. This man revived the dead Tabitha and had a vision where God tells him to eat \"unclean\" animals on his way to visit the centurion Cornelius. At the beginning of Acts, this disciple of Jesus addresses the crowd at Pentecost. For 10 points, name this disciple, who denied his master three times before the crucifixion and was said to be the rock that the church would be built on.", "Saint Peter", "H"]
["This figure once shot some arrows and used the code phrase \"Isn't the arrow behind you?\" as a sign for someone else to run away. He once ate honey, inadvertently violating his father's vow that no one should eat until a military victory. In one scene, he gives his robe, tunic, and weapons to his best friend as a sign of his loyalty. Aside from his death, he is last seen meeting his friend in the Desert of Ziph, where he predicts he will be second in command to that friend, who is currently fleeing the king, this figure's father. After this man's death, his friend sings a song of lament, mourning \"Your love for me was\u0085more wonderful than that of women.\" He is killed with his brothers and father on Mount Gilboa by the Philistines, paving the way for his best friend to become the second king of Israel. For 10 points, name this son of Saul and very good friend of David.", "Jonathan", "H"]
["In Luke 21:1-4, Jesus contrasts a group of men performing this action with one woman who does it better than them. A karmkand may be exchanged for one performance of this action, known as Bhiksha, in Hinduism. Allah ordains that those who refuse to perform this action will have their foreheads, flanks, and backs branded with the fires of Hell. The Jewish form of this practice used to include the custom of leaving the gleanings from crops and is known as Tzedakah. Wayfarers, converts, and those working for Allah are three of the eight categories of people who may benefit from this action in Islam, whose less famous version is known as Sadaqqa. The survival of Theravada monks depends entirely on this practice, which Muslims perform by setting aside 2.5% of their income. For 10 points, zakat is a form of what charitable rite?", "Alms", "H"]
["A popular story from the Golden Light Sutra tells of how the Buddha did this action after seeing a hungry lioness. In one of the Jatakas, the Buddha does this action as a hare, only to find out it was a test of virtue by Sakka. Islamic scholars differentiate this action from the prohibited inti\u1e25\u0101r and one who does it is known is called a shahid. This non-fasting action is often performed by Jains who have obtained inner peace and is called sallekhan\u0101 or santhara. The Judaic idea of \"Yehareg ve'al ya'avor\" refers to doing this to avoid committing a cardinal sin. Another form of it was banned by the British government in 1829 and is named for a wife of Shiva. For 10 points, name this action exemplified by sati, in which Hindu women set themselves on fire on their husbands' pyres, and by some terrorists because they believe it will guarantee them entry into heaven.", "Self-denial", "H"]
["One faction of this belief system holds that the world consists of five basic differences and claims that a group of souls called \"tamo-yogyas\" are eternally damned. This denomination holds that a supreme being called Para has four eminations, or vyuhas, that help believers achieve waking, dreaming, sleeping, and transcendental meditative states This group believes that the presence of Antaryami, or the immanent God within, which is incorporated in bhaki practices such as bhajan, or singing a certain figure's name, and dharana, or meditating upon that figure's form. The Gaudiya faction of this denomination considers that figure as the Svayam Bhagavan, and is derived from the Puranas and the Ramayana. Its followers who attain moksha will live in Vaikuntha where they can worship that figure and his consort, Lakshmi. For 10 points, name this school of Hinduism that worships Vishnu and his avatars as the supreme God.", "Gautama Buddha in Hinduism", "H"]
["If a person is not able to sacrifice a lamb before this holiday begins, they may do so a month later on the 14th of Iyar, and on the eve of it, people often go around their homes with a candle, a feather, and a spoon which they will burn later. Other traditions of this holiday include counting the number of days until Shavout, which is called the Counting of the Omer, and the hiding of a dessert called (*) afikomen. Children answer the \"Four Questions\" during this holiday. Beginning on the 15th of Nisan, it also sees the eating of bitter herbs at a meal where participants drink four cups of wine. That meal is called the Seder and sees a man break pieces of matzah. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday commemorating the Exodus from Egypt.", "Passover", "H"]
["King Alpha and Queen Omega are continually referenced in one sacred book of this religion, whose founders included Joseph Hibbert and Archibald Dunkley. Another important founder of it was the street preacher Leonard Howell, who wrote the aforementioned The Promise Key. (*)\"Livity,\" or lifestyle, is a main focus for practitioners of this religion. Members of this religion do not consume such items as soda, coffee, alcohol, or pork according to ital and belong to different branches called \"mansions.\" It praises Haile Selassie as the reincarnation of Jesus Christ. For 10 points, name this religion founded in Jamaica that promotes Afrocentrism and pot.", "Rastafari", "H"]
["In chapter 5 of this book, the author notes that \"we also rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering works perseverance; and perseverance, proven character; and proven character, hope.\" This book says that \"there is one God who will justify the circumcised by faith, and the uncircumcised through faith.\" Although this book says God \"will pay back to everyone according to their works,\" (*) Martin Luther based his theory of salvation by faith alone on this book. This New Testament book discusses a dual covenant and also contains the verse \"for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life.\" For 10 points, name this first Pauline epistle, addressed to an Italian church.", "Epistle to the Romans", "H"]
["A branch of this sect which has no monks was founded by a man who believed in mappo, the decline of dharma. That leader of this sect preached reliance on tariki, or \"other power\" in order to attain freedom from rebirth. The founder of this sect's Japanese Jodo Shinshu school was Shinran, and this sect's first Chinese monastery was built on Mount Lushan. One school of this sect was founded by (*) Honen, who advocated its practice by simply reciting the nembutsu. This sect's adherents wish to enter Sukhavati so that they can receive assistance attaining nirvana from Amitabha. For 10 points, name this sect of Buddhism whose adherents seek admission to its namesake paradise.", "Pure Land Buddhism", "H"]
["In China, a festival celebrating this group sees the burning of joss paper and ends with the illuminated lanterns being set afloat. Saint Odilo of Cluny started a Christian practice for them and was known for being paid to say prayers for these people. These people are controversially baptized by the Church of Latter-Day Saints. The festival of Zh\u014dngyu\u00e1n seeks to save these people from a deity that rides a water buffalo, King (*) Yama. In North America, Halloween has taken over the Christian holidays of All Saints' and All Souls' Day in commemorating them, while in Judaism the Kaddish is read for them. For 10 points, name these people who are the subject of elegies and who are no longer alive.", "Otto; or Up with Dead People", "H"]
["Some of this figure's close disciples, or ganadharas, were Gautama and Jambu Swami. Before this figure's birth, his mother Trishala had fourteen strange dreams. Symbolized by a lion, this man was tested by the god Sangama, who tried to frighten him while he was meditating. After renouncing all his possessions and meditating for twelve years, this successor to (*) Parshva advanced the principle of truthfulness, satya. The last \"fordmaker,\" this man is usually depicted with no clothes by Digambaras, who follow his teachings. For 10 points, name this 24th and last Tirthankara who established modern-day Jainism.", "Mahavira", "H"]
["Practitioners of this religion often worship at temples called o\u00fafos and believe that the soul is made of a \"little\" and a \"big\" spirit, the former of which is responsible for dreams. A death ritual in this religion sees a priest collect a special deity in a jar called a govi. Those deities are represented by symbols called (*) veves and are divided into such groups as Petro, Ghede, Rada. Mambos and houngans are priestesses and priests in this religion whose supreme deity is Bondye. Some of the most important spirits in it include Ogoun, Papa Legba, and one that wears a tuxedo and a top hat, Baron Samedi; those spirits are known as loas. For 10 points, name this syncretic religion mainly practiced in Haiti.", "Voodoo", "H"]
["Pius V claimed that the performance of this action by a group in Rome brought about the victory at Lepanto, thus establishing the \"Feast\" of this practice on the first Sunday of October. While performing this ritual, one reflects on the \"Joyful,\" \"Sorrowful,\" \"Luminous,\" or \"Glorious\" mysteries according to the day of the week. This practice is said to have been created by Saint (*) Dominic during the time of the Albigensian Heresy. According to legend, Mary once took flowers from the lips of a monk performing this ritual and wove them into a garland for herself. This practice involves the recitation of fifteen \"decades,\" or sets of Hail Mary's, with ten \"Our Fathers\" at each decade. For 10 points, name this prayer to the Virgin Mary recited using a set of beads.", "Methods of praying the rosary", "H"]
["One school of thought in this religion advises abstaining from grains in order to kill the \"Three Worms.\" Another school within this religion urges practicioners to cultivate their \"Divine Embryos,\" drawing on a story in which this religion's founder gave birth to himself at age 81. This religion holds that by holding to virtue, one can obtain a type of power called (*) de. In one important text from this religion, the writer cannot tell if it was he who was dreaming he was a butterfly or vice-versa. Another text in this religion says that a journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step. For 10 points, name this Chinese religion whose central book is the D\u00e0od\u00e9j\u012bng.", "Taoism", "H"]
["The Vedic ritual of ashvamedha is one type of this practice, which is done extensively at a Nepalese festival honoring the Hindu deity Gadhimai. Another type of this practice is jhatka, which Sikhs consider to be the opposite of the kutha method. In Judaism, a sochet is someone who is trained to do this, which is referred to as shechita and is similar to the Islamic ritual of dhabihah. In \u00ac1992, the city of Hialeah, Florida pressed charges against followers of (*) Santeria because they did this in public. In Judaism, this is done with a sakin, a knife which is used to sever major vessels of the neck. Halal and kosher laws consider, for 10 points, what practice of killing a living creature in order to eat its flesh?", "Animal sacrifice", "H"]
["This figure was raised in a temple after the casting of lots and found to be miraculously provided with food whenever Zechariah checked. While alone in the desert, this figure is told by a voice to shake a palm tree trunk to find nourishment. This figure's namesake sura explains the conception of John the Baptist, and one of this figure's titles, Mustafia, marks her as (*) chosen above all other women. This only woman mentioned by name in the Quran was born after Anne prayed to Allah for a child protected from Satan and consecrated to God, which led to the birth of her own child who denounced her detractors from his cradle. For 10 points, name this mother of Jesus.", "Maryam", "H"]
["This man once built an altar out of twelve stones to represent the twelve tribes of Israel, set an offering upon it, and saturated it with water three times. During a religious experience, this man witnessed an earthquake, whirlwind, and fire, but only heard the voice of God in a \"still, small voice.\" He once hid next to a brook called the Wadi Cherith, where he was fed by (*) ravens twice a day. This man resurrected the son of the Widow of Zarephath and received a revelation at Mount Horeb. He called fire down from heaven during a contest with the priests of Baal, thereby proving the superiority of Yahweh over the god of Jezebel. For 10 points, name this Hebrew prophet before being was taken into heaven by a chariot of fire.", "Elijah", "H"]
["One of these beings had her nose and ears cut off after she was spurned by a certain prince and jealously threatened his wife. Another tried to capture Hanuman by pulling on his shadow. Yet another of these beings, the son of Hidimbi and Bhima, was killed by a divine weapon that Karna had been saving to use on Arjuna. These beings, which included Surpanakha and Ghatotkacha, were first created when they emerged from Brahma's foot. The largest of them slept through all but two days of the year. Besides (*) the aforementioned Kumbhakarna and his brother Vibheeshana, they include Maricha, who transformed into a golden deer and tricked Lakshmana and his brother into leaving their camp. Their ten-headed king then kidnapped Sita. For 10 points, name these demons led by the king Ravana, who are the antagonists of the Ramayana.", "Rakshasa", "H"]
["Due to his paranoia, Isaac Neiberg's committing of this action in the town of Cleves was declared invalid by Jewish scholars. The mubarat form of this action sees one person pay an amount less than the mahr, while the related khul form has no limit on the payment. In Islam this action is followed by a three month period known as iddah and some Muslims believe it can be performed by saying the word \"talaq\" three times in a row. In Judaism, this action is performed with a document known as a (*) get. The closest equivalent to this action in the Roman Catholic Church is the issuing of a \"Declaration of Nulity,\" and in general Christianity treats this action negatively because the bond between a man and a woman is considered \"one flesh.\" For 10 points, name this act of dissolving a marriage.", "Divorce", "H"]
["One religious leader of this faith focused on using sudden sounds or actions to make pupils see their true nature and ye-xi, or original consciousness. In addition to Mazu Doayi, another leader of this faith wrote two manuals for believers at Shaolin and is described as the \"Blue Eyed Barbarian\" in such texts as The Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall. This religion's founder came to China from India and was inspired by the Lankavatara Sutra and the Flower Sermon. That leader, Bodhidharma, taught that activities outside of studying scripture such as sesshin and the contemplation of paradoxes were the way to achieve satori, or enlightenment. For 10 points, name this sect of Mahayana Buddhism associated with koans and various forms of meditation that is popular in Japan.", "Zen", "H"]
["Three times a day, members of this faith perfom an ablution and tie and untie a sacred girdle made of 72 threads called the kushi. Members of this faith strive to follow a three-fold path of \"good thoughts, good words, good deeds\". Temples in this religion keep a perpetual fire to mark the presence of the spirit of divine truth called \"Asha\". After death, adherents of this faith have three days to meditate on their past life before being judged by Mithra, Sraosha, and Rashnu, while in the physical world their body is exposed and eaten by vultures in a Tower of Silence. The primary deity of this religion enlists the aid of the Amesha Spentas to fight the evil Ahriman. For 10 points, name this dualistic Persian religion that worships Ahura-Mazda, founded by Zarathustra.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["One character in this work has a vision of animals being lowered in a sheet immediately prior to meeting the soldier Cornelius. Near the end of this work, one character is interrogated by governors Felix and Festus. One chapter features a man interpreting the book of Isaiah for an Ethiopian eunuch, while the first chapter records Matthias being chosen as a replacement. Like an earlier text, it is addressed to the writer's friend Theophilus. This book includes such events as the deceit of Ananias and Sapphira, the stoning of Stephen, and the Holy Spirit descending on Pentecost. For 10 points, name this book attributed to Luke, which describes the conversion and ministry of Paul and is the fifth text in the New Testament.", "Acts of the Apostles", "H"]
["Clays from this region have glassy spherules with limestone-like chemistry, and another characteristic of this region is the presence of quartz with various criss-cross patterns. Abnormally high concentrations of a transition element at this region led to a proposition that the Chicxulub Crater was caused by a meteor striking the Earth, and was advanced by Walter and Luis Alvarez. It is thought that the dinosaurs died out at the same time that this rock layer was formed from dust and debris from a meteor about 65.5 million years ago. For 10 points, identify this layer of rocks that mark the distinction between the Cretaceous and Tertiary periods.", "K-T Boundary ", "H"]
["One early division in this faith was sparked by Elias Hicks in reaction to the evangelical nature of the Second Great Awakening and presaged the development of the conservative Wilburite factions of this faith in Iowa, North Carolina, and Ohio. Many congregations in this faith teach children at \"First Day\" School, a term from their depaganized \"plain calendar.\" While every Yearly Meeting of this faith may espouse different ideals, most members of this sect believe they possess the \"inner light\" of God. The traditional service of this church is unprogrammed and allows anyone to speak if they desire. Historically known for their pacifism and plain dress For 10 points, identify this Christian religion, founded by George Fox, once whose members identify themselves as \"friends\".", "Quakers", "H"]
["Purpling of tissue and exposure of bare skeleton are symptoms of infection of these organisms by Aspergillus sydowii, while stress induced decline of zooxanthellae density in these structures causes a decrease in their productivity and makes them turn colorless, a process which is called bleaching. Darwin proposed that these organisms may accumulate into \"fringing\" or atoll like structures. They are composed of calcium carbonate secreting anthozoa which form polyps. For 10 points, identify these organisms that sometimes form underwater structures such as the Great Barrier one off the coast of Australia.", "Coral reef", "H"]
["This man won a coat of arms from Sigismund Bathory after he killed three Turks in duels. He later was captured and worked as a slave for a woman in Constantinople. This man replaced Matthew Scrivener in one post and was earlier arrested by Christopher Newport, who regarded him as a troublemaking mutineer. He eventually set up such policies as \"He who does not work, will not eat.\" After his injury in a gunpowder accident, forcing his return to England, his colony underwent the horrific \"Starving Time.\" Much of his exploits are revealed his Generall Historie of Virginia, including his capture by Chief Powhatan. For 10 points, name this leader of Jamestown, who is remembered today for apocryphally having his life saved by Pocahontas.", "John Smith", "H"]
["In Pope Paul VI's text \"Paenitemini,\" he suggested that this practice should be replaced with ways \"to promote better social justice\" in certain countries. On the Hindu day of Karva Chauth, married women engage in this practice to ensure their husbands' safety. A Jewish variant of this practice takes its name from an assassinated governor named Gedalia. In the first of his temptations in Matthew 6, Satan tells Jesus to end this practice. Jews are commanded to do this during the day of Tisha B'Av, while Catholics must engage in this practice on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday. Muslims engage in this practice from dawn to dusk during the month of Ramadan, For 10 points, name this religious practice that typically involves not consuming food.", "Fasting", "H"]
["One of these creatures is featured at the bottom of Lucas Cranach the Elder's The Crucifixion with the Converted Centurion, and one of these is shown attacked by a lion in a work by George Stubbs. Rosa Bonheur painted a number of these animals running in a circle in one work, and the head of one of these creatures is depicted looking on from the left as an incubus sits on a sleeping woman in another painting. Aguste Macke and Franz Marc lead a German art movement named after a painting prominently featuring one of these animals, and four of these creatures enter the scene from the left as their riders wreck havoc in a Durer etching. For 10 points, name these animals, which are ridden by certain four figures of the Apocalypse.", "Horse", "H"]
["This faith's doctrine is determined at the triennial General Convention by the House of Bishops and a mix of clergy and laypeople called the House of Deputies. This church's Presiding Bishop rules over both the \"815\" and the Cathedral of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Its current leader, Katherine Jefferts Schori, was the only female primate at the 2008 Lambeth Meeting. Services in this faith are often divided into \"high\" or \"low\" church depending on the presence of traditional Catholic rituals. This denomination uses a version of the Book of Common Prayer that was modified in 1789 to remove all references to British monarchy. For 10 points, name this Christian denomination that recently voted to allow gay people in all positions, the primary member of the Anglican Communion in the United States.", "Episcopal Church", "H"]
["A spurious history of this incident was written by \"Captain\" William Bedloe, who provided information regarding the mysterious murder of Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey. This incident resulted in the deaths of Oliver Plunkett and Edward Colman. This incident fueled support for the Earl of Shaftesbury's Exclusion Bill, which tried to block James, the Duke of York, from ascending to the throne. Information about it came from a manuscript that claimed royal physician Sir George Wakeman was a conspirator. This incident saw Israel Tonge and his confederate claim to have discovered a plan to assassinate Charles II. For 10 points, identify this fictitious conspiracy invented by Titus Oates, which claimed the Jesuits wanted to place a Catholic on the English throne.", "Popish Plot", "H"]
["Ma Laichi, a Chinese adherent of this sect founded a school that was called \"the silent ones\" because they practiced silent invocation of God. Schools of this sect practice dhikr and strive for a primordial state called fitra. The khadims based in Ajmer are followers of a popular scholar in this sect, named Khwaja Moinuddin Chisti, while the Naqshbandi School of this sect traces the silsilah to Mohammed via Abu Bakr. Schools in this sect are led by Murshids. The author of the Spiritual Couplets, Rumi belonged to this sect, while ascetics in this sect are called dervishes. For 10 points, identify this mystical sect of Islam, which advocates a personal relationship with God.", "Sufism", "H"]
["One of these objects was brought back instead of the herb Sanjeeyani by Hanuman. Himavan [him-uh-vahn] was the lord of these structures, while Himavan's daughter Parvati has a name which invokes these geographical features. Krishna lifted one on his pinky finger to shelter the citizens of Vrindavan from wrath of Indra. The serpent Vasuki was wrapped around one of these structures, which was placed atop Kurma during the churning of the ocean. Parvati's husband Shiva made his residence at one of these structures called Kailash. For 10 points, identify these geographical structures, many of which can be found in the Himalayas.", "Mountain", "H"]
["This festival sometimes intersects with a Sikh celebration that sees mock fights held during Hola Mohallah. Hindu festivals for this celebration are called Ugadi or Gudi Padva, and see the transition into Chaitra. It is also celebrated on one of the ten days of Muharram. The Jewish holiday for this recognizes Moses' revelation on Mount Sinai, sees a reading of Genesis to remind practitioners of the creation of the Universe, and involves consuming apples dipped in honey. For 10 points, identify this type of celebration exemplified by Rosh Hashanah, whose secular festivities usually occur on December 31 and January 1st.", "New Year", "H"]
["The Kapla is the biography of this religion's founder. Books called the Cheda contain rules for monks in this religion. The most important texts in this religion are the Agamas. Vision, knowledge, and conduct are the so-called \"triple gems\" of this religion. Each of this religion's prophets was smaller than the one that came before him; these prophets are called the 24 bridge-makers, or Tirthankars, the most recent of which was this religion's founder, Mahavira. Because of this religion's principle of ahimsa, some members wear masks to avoid accidentally inhaling and killing insects. For 10 points, name this Indian religion committed to non-violence.", "Jainism", "H"]
["This man used a curse placed upon him by Urvashi to become a eunuch for a year of his choosing as a means of disguise. After serving as a tutor in that disguise, this man married his son Abhimanyu to the daughter of Raja Virata. This man recognized Shiva in a fight and was rewarded with a weapon, the pashupata. This man used skills he learned from Drona to win his wife and killed his half-brother Karna while in battle against the Kauravas. This son of Indra also spent 13 years in exile with his four brothers and their wife Draupadi. For 10 points, name this Pandava, the hero of the Mahabharata, whose charioteer was Krishna.", "Arjuna", "H"]
["Gabriel helps this man interpret a prophecy of Jeremiah that predicts seventy weeks in the history of the Israelites. This man's vision of a ram fighting a goat represents the kingdoms of Greece and Persia, but he declares that \"only the Kingdom of God\" will endure forever after interpreting a dream of an idol with feet made of iron and clay. This man exposes the fraudulent worship of Bel, sees three of his companions thrown into a furnace for refusing to bow to an idol of Nebuchadnezzar, and interprets the writing on the wall at Belshazzar's Feast. For 10 points, name this prophet who also survived a night in the lion's den.", "Daniel", "H"]
["Before this view was officially adopted, it was supported by the Spanish monk Guido Terrena. Proponents of this religious doctrine point to John 11:49, where God grants the power of prophecy to Caiaphus, the judge who condemns Jesus, as proof that God can grant power even to people with moral shortcomings. Opponents of this doctrine point to the apparent endorsement of Monothelitism by Honorius I. This dogma applies only to statements made ex cathedra about theology. It was first invoked in 1950 about the Assumption of Mary, but was first articulated in 1870 at the First Vatican Council. For 10 points, name this dogma of the Catholic Church, which says that in some circumstances its leader can never be wrong.", "Papal infallibility", "H"]
["Central Asia and China saw the spreading of this belief system's Naqshbandi sect, which is unique for not being derived from religious orders called tariqa. Followers attempt to attain a state of oneness with God, or self-annihilation, called fana. Practitioners may also practice dhikr, the recitation of God's names, to activate extra-sensory organs called the Six Subtleties. The poet Rumi popularized one sect whose ascetic adherents meditate by spinning in circles. Featuring the Whirling Dervishes and named for the woolen clothes of its adherents, for 10 points, name this mystical Islamic belief system.", "Sufism", "H"]
["This work's theme of righteousness can be seen in a passage which describes how God will give to each person according to what he has done, though it also encourages the title recipients to give their bodies as living sacrifices. This book is better known for its third chapter, which says all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God, as well as its tenth chapter, which includes a request to confess \"Jesus is Lord.\" It ends with an expression of its author's desire to visit the inhabitants of a city who are this letter's audience, though the author's actual visit ended with his beheading during the reign of Nero. For 10 points, name this epistle written by Paul to the inhabitants of the capital of a namesake Empire led by the Caesars.", "Epistle to the Romans", "H"]
["In one traditional rite that takes place on this holiday, men defend themselves with shields as women from Radha attack them with staves. It also includes a \"swing festival\" in which songs are sung while images of gods are swung around on moving platforms. One rite performed during this holiday commemorates the loyalty and miraculous fire resistance of Prahlada at the hands of Hiranyakashipu, who is killed by the Visnu lion-man avatar Narasimha. That rite is the burning of massive bonfires early in the morning. On this main day of this holiday, celebrants throw colored water and colored powder on each other. For 10 points, name this festive spring Hindu holiday.", "Holi", "H"]
["This book has been subjected to theological theories called the \"framework interpretation,\" and the \"omphalos hypothesis.\" This book relates the destruction of the Elamite king Chedorlaomer during at battle at the Vale of Siddim. In one story from this book, Simeon and Levi kill the men of Shechem to avenge the rape of their sister Dinah. It relates the story of God smiting Onan to punish him for spilling his seed. This book discusses the wandering of Hagar through the desert, the Curse of Ham, Jacob's Ladder, and the construction of the Tower of Babel. For 10 points, name this book which also discusses the cursing of Cain and the expulsion from the Garden of Eden, the first book of the Bible.", "Genesis", "H"]
["This state saw a city's mayor, Bracken Lee, fire police chief and future political theorist Cleon Skousen after the mayor was found at an illegal card game. The Senate held three years of hearings on whether to seat this state's Reed Smoot. A crime committed by a resident of this state led to the case of Reynolds v. U.S. One event in this state's history involved the founding of Camp Floyd by Albert Sidney Johnston, who was seeking to rein in a group responsible for the Mountain Meadows Massacre. It first applied for statehood as Deseret, and was frequently blocked due to its legal approval of polygamy. For 10 points, name this state, the final destination of Brigham Young's Mormons.", "Utah", "H"]
["Thirty-four of these works lack titles, and are traditionally known as \"orphans.\" A number of these works are \"acrostics,\" in which successive lines begin with successive letters of the alphabet. One of these works requests, \"If I forget thee...may my right hand forget its skill,\" and begins \"By the rivers of Babylon we sat and wept.\" The most famous of these works describes walking through \"the valley of the shadow of death\" and begins, \"The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.\" For 10 points, name these 150 poems in the Old Testament, traditionally attributed to David.", "Psalm 96", "H"]
["Abuses within this movement were detailed by journalists John Hubner and Lindsey Gruson in the book Monkey on a Stick, and Robin George was awarded $32 million in a lawsuit against this group for false imprisonment. A commune for this group was founded in West Virginia in 1968 and called New Vrindavan. This movement was founded by Swami Prabhupada. Members of this movement believe that mankind is currently living in the age of Kali and advocate a \"return to Godhead\" by practicing Bhakti-yoga. For 10 points, name this religious movement whose followers shave their heads except for a topknot and recite the namesake chant.", "International Society for Krishna Consciousness", "H"]
["This man cursed one city so that its citizens would lose their first son for relaying that city's foundation and their youngest son for rebuilding the city's gates. This man commanded an army that was victorious at Rephidim while fighting against the Amalekites. Along with Caleb, this man gives a positive report of Canaan when he is sent there as one of twelve spies. This son of Nun was renamed by Moses. As directed by God, this leader had seven priests with rams' horns and the Ark of the Covenant march around a city for seven days. For 10 points, name this Biblical leader of the Israelites who conquered Jericho without a fight.", "Joshua", "H"]
["In the 17th century, these people had to pay a \"body tax,\" a customs fee for entering cities. In 1320, they were targeted by the \"Shepherds' Crusade.\" Later, these people were temporarily held at the camp of Drancy. The first of these people to become prime minister instituted the 40-hour work week and was the leader of the Socialist Party. Another of these people was sent to Devil's Island, condemned for crimes perpetrated by Ferdinand Esterhazy, and was defended by Emile Zola. For 10 points, name these people who include Alfred Dreyfus, who might celebrate Hannukah in Lyons.", "History of the Jews in France", "H"]
["According to one legend from this religion, its founder's eyelids became the first tea plant after he cut them off in anger. A record of the early history of this religion is known as the Records of the Transmission of the Lamp. Important figures in this religion's history include Mahakasyapa, who wordlessly understood a sermon. Its major sects include Obaku, Soto, and Rinzai, and its adherents seek Satori. The founder of this religion took a famous journey to the east, where he visited the emperor and spent nine years staring at a cave wall. Bodhidharma's teachings and the \"Flower Sermon\" are foundational teachings of, for 10 points, what contemplative sect of Buddhism.", "Zen", "H"]
["After his death, this man's papers were edited by his student, Theodore Beza. This Christian theologian's followers later split into supralapsarians and infralapsarians. After his death, this theologian's central ideas were summarized into the \"Five Points\", which can be abbreviated as TULIP and which include the ideas of Irresistible Grace and Total Depravity. This theologian set forth his beliefs in the book Institutes of the Christian Religion. For 10 points, name this Protestant reformer from Geneva, whose namesake denomination believes in predestination.", "John Calvin", "H"]
["One source says that the total number of these is odd because odd numbers are more lovely and that anyone who memorizes all of them will be rewarded. One of these terms translates to \"the governor,\" while another means \"the delayer\" and another \"the manifest.\" The 59th verse of \"al-Hashr\" says that this group of terms is \"the most beautiful,\" and the 17th verse of \"al-Isra\" says that this group of terms is \"all the attributes of perfection.\" They also include \"ar-raheem,\" or \"the merciful,\" and \"al-malikm\" or \"the lord.\" For 10 points, identify this group of 99 epithets for an important figure in Islam.", "Names of God in Islam", "H"]
["This religion reveres a young woman who \"understands the simplicity of all\" and it uses the term \"vin-dit\" to describe a religious epiphany. Its adherents proclaim \"Now I destroy the world\" shortly before dying and its scriptures are divided into sections called calypsos. This religion's most important ritual involves two practitioners joining the soles of their feet. This religion, founded by Lionel Boyd Johnson, holds that each person unknowingly does God's will with the help of a group called a karass, though there exist false karasses known as granfaloons. For 10 points, name this religion illegally practiced by every citizen of San Lorenzo in Kurt Vonnegut's Cat's Cradle.", "Bokononism", "H"]
["Through his daughter, who was forcibly married to Rhacius, this man became the grandfather of the champion diviner Mopsus. He was also the father of the woman who allowed Alcmene to give birth to Heracles by scaring away certain witches; that daughter was named Historis. This man lived for at least seven generations, and after his death from drinking the waters of Telphussa, he advised against harming the cattle of Helios. After killing a snake, he was transformed into a woman for seven years, and he later was punished for saying women enjoy sex more by being blinded. For 10 points, name this prophet of Thebes, who revealed Oedipus as the murderer of Laius.", "Tiresias", "H"]
["The sura \"The City of Saba\" describes one building in this city as having cauldrons and arches put in place by djinns. This city was once the home of \"the farthest mosque,\" which was travelled to on the horse Buraq. Before the choice of Mecca, this city was faced towards while praying. This waypoint on the Night Journey is where the Well of Souls is found under the Dome of the Rock; this city is also home to the al-Aqsa mosque, built on the Temple Mount. For 10 points, identify this city which, behind Mecca and Medina, is often called the \"third holiest\" in Islam.", "Jerusalem", "H"]
["The kenning for Baldr's funerary boat contains the name of this figure, whose descendent Grani is a companion of the hero Sigurd. In the Prose Edda, Gangleri is told how Thor bet Hrungnir that this figure was superior to Gullfaxi. He is born after the gods wager the sun, the moon, and Freyja against a builder's ability to build Valhalla without another man's help. The builder makes incredible progress with his animal helper Svadilfari, so Loki seduces Svadilfari while disguised as a mare, later giving birth to this figure. For 10 points, name this eight-legged horse of Odin.", "Sleipnir", "H"]
["The char joog no chanto is performed by Nizari Ismailis due to their belief in this process. In Hinduism, the illusions produced by maya promote this process which is undergone by the jiva, or eternal soul, and a common metaphor for it involves the casting off and acquisition of new clothing. This process is central to (*) samsara, and it is escaped through moksha. It is mediated by an individual's karma, which may allow one to access the heavenly planets when it occurs. For 10 points, name this process common to Jainism, Hinduism, and Buddhism, which is has been undergone several times by the Buddha and is ended in nirvana.", "Reincarnation", "H"]
["He conflicted with Johannes Oecolampadius at a meeting about the natural of the sacrament. This man wrote a mass in the vernacular which omitted all requirements of candles and vestments. He released 12 Articles in response to radicalization by peasants, and he was excommunicated by the Papal bull Exsurge Domine before his attendance at the Marburg Colloquy. This author of the German Mass, in addition to both the Small and Large Catechisms, was called before the Diet of Worms to answer for his heresy, and he promulgated the Augsburg Confession. For 10 points, name this religious figure who began Protestantism by nailing 95 Theses to the door of a church.", "Martin Luther", "H"]
["One figure revered during this event suffered arrow shots through both eyes and the heart, making his judgments fairer. One of its traditional foods is shaped like gold ingots, and others include bags of oranges or tangerines; wives who seek to bear children sometimes eat lotus seeds during it. Preceded by a thorough house-cleaning and ending with a (*) Lantern Festival on its fifteenth day, it involves giving money in envelopes, which are red for good luck. For 10 points, identify this celebration, often involving firecrackers and the dancing of giant puppeteered dragons, which in February 2011 ushered in the Year of the Rabbit.", "Tiangong-1", "H"]
["This man's wife was denied her inheritance of the land of Fadak, while this man's own claim to inheritance was based on words spoken at the pond of Khumm. Thuss supporters of this man did not take an oath at Saqifah. Although he fought an inconclusive battle at Siffin, his forces were victorious at the Battle of the (*) Camel. He was eventually murdered by a Kharijite and succeeded by his rival, Mu'awiyya. This man's older son, Hasan, did not fight at Karbala, where his younger son, Husayn, was martyred. Earlier, this man had benefited from the murder of 'Uthman to become the fourth Rightly Guided Caliph. For 10 points, identify this son-in-law of the Prophet Muhammad who is revered as the first imam by the Shi'a.", "Ali", "H"]
["One end-times scenario of this faith involves a river of metal created by melting all the minerals of the earth. The first ruler to adopt it as an official faith was King Vishtaspa, and one of its rituals involves a drink made from water, pomegranate leaves, and the haoma plant. It lumps together all evil actions as falsehoods, or druj, and, like in Judaism, each of its temples houses a sacred fire. Its (*) Vendidad text describes the evil daevas and discourages burial in favor of leaving bodies on vulture-inhabited Towers of Silence, and its founder allegedly wrote the Gathas as part of its holy scripture, the Zend Avesta. For 10 points, name this religion that believes in the evil Ahriman's fight with the good god Ahura Mazda and is named for its Persian prophet founder.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["One part of this text describes snorting war horses that charge early in the morning and goes on to describethe ungrateful nature of man. The title figure of one section is told to shake a palm tree to drop fresh dates during the birth of Jesus, while another section features the \"Throne Verse\" and the striking of a murderer after the sacrifice of a yellow heifer. Those sections, called \"Mary\" and \"The (*) Cow,\" are found, after an opening asking for direction \"along the straight path,\" among readings arranged by order of length that are subdivided into ayat. Its 114 readings, of which all but the ninth begin with the word \"Bismillah,\" are called suras. For 10 points, name this holiest book of Islam.", "Quran", "H"]
["Historical accounts of this faith include God Passes By, which recounts a declaration in the garden of Ridvan. Martha Root is among its select, saint-like group called the Hands of the Cause; that group was established by the son of this faith's founder in that son's Will and Testament, and disbanded from the 1920s until 1957 by its leader, Shoghi (*) Effendi. Its founder wrote an allegorical text called The Seven Valleys, and its calendar includes a month-long, and thereby 19-day, fast. This faith's Book of Certitude describes progressive revelation and the unity of all world faiths. For 10 points, name this religion whose Universal House of Justice is in Haifa, Israel, a tolerant monotheistic faith begun in Persia by Baha'ullah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["The Megalensia festival celebrated a Black Stone belonging to this deity, who was also worshipped at the Hilaria festival. In the Aeneid, a row of beached ships are turned into sea nymphs by this goddess. This deity was worshipped by a cult of dancer-warriors called Corybantes. According to tradition, she resurrected and deified a (*) castrated lover named Attis and had a chariot drawn by lions, often held to be Atalanta and Hippomenes transformed after they consummated their marriage in this goddess's temple. Conflated with Rhea and the Roman Magna Mater, for 10 points, name this Phrygian goddess of growth, fertility, and the earth.", "Cybele", "H"]
["Muhammad said that this man looked like his friend Urwah ibn Mas'ud. Adherents of the Ahmadi sect believe he went by the name Yuz Asaf when he died in Kashmir, and unlike mainstream Muslims they do not believe that he will fight Dajjal [duj-JAL]. He talked as a newborn to denounce critics of his mother, who was a priestess in a temple run by Zechariah. He will not die until he (*) returns to assist the Mahdi and establish just rule on earth, which is possible because was raised to Heaven before people thought they killed him. While on earth, he foretold the coming of Muhammad and revealed his own divine scripture. For 10 points, name this prophet born to a virgin mother.", "Jesus", "H"]
["One prayer that follows this action has a long sequence of lines beginning \"ha-rakhaman,\" while a general blessing before it ends \"she-ha-kol neeyeh bid'varoh.\" On a wedding day, the bride and groom do not do this from sunrise until the ceremony is complete, and generally a (*) hekhsher indicates objects to which this action can be done. Blessings recited after it are called birkat ha-mazon, while the motzi [\"MOH-tsee\"] is said before doing it in one circumstance. The laws of kashrut govern this action; those may be better known as the \"kosher laws.\" For 10 points, name this action, which is not done on Yom Kippur but may be applied to hamantashen or potato latkes.", "Eating", "H"]
["Edward Grim relates how those involved in this action were assisted by Hugh the Evil-Clerk. Among the people who carried out this action were William de Tracy and Richard le Breton. The fallout from this event ended with the Compromise of Avranches signed in part by Pope Alexander III. The person targeted in this event, who earlier sought refuge under the French king Louis VII, had (*) refused to comply with the Constitutions of Clarendon. According to legend, the man who ordered this event shouted \"will no one rid me of this turbulent priest\", causing four knights to enter into Canterbury Cathedral. For 10 points, name this 1170 event which saw agents of Henry II murder an English archbishop.", "Lapford", "H"]
["Only one of these texts includes the notion that its central figure's relatives doubted his sanity, and another describes that figure's parents searching for him when he stayed with teachers rather than join a caravan. The documentary theory explaining the similarities of these texts includes the possibility of a (*) Q source. Instances recorded by all of these texts include the calling of Levi and the healing of a leper. Only of these texts describe the marriage at Cana, one omits the Sermon on the Mount, and two of these texts include a genealogy of Christ. For 10 points, identify this grouping of the books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, which describe the life of Christ.", "The Four Gospels", "H"]
["One figure in this tradition has a hundred or more epithets, each signifying a possibly non-physical \"path.\" One of its rituals involves a wooden board onto which sixteen palm nuts are thrown, and its initiations include one named for a group called \"The Warriors.\" Known for its divination ceremony, Ifa, its believers make offerings called ebos and believe that a spiritual energy called ashe comes from their chief god, (*) Olurun or Oludumare. Rooted in traditions of the Yoruba people, and reverent of spirits called orishas, for 10 points, name this religion for which the US Supreme Court upheld the right to religious animal sacrifice, an Afro-Cuban faith often translated \"Way of the Saints.\"", "Santer\u00eda", "H"]
["Members of this community carried out the 1860 massacres at Dayr al-Qamr and Zahlah. One member of this group, Sultan al-Atrash, occupied Suwayda in 1925 and sparked the so-called \"Great Revolt\" against the French. Another leader of this community was Kamal Jumblatt, who was assassinated in 1977, likely on the orders of Hafiz al-Asad. Members of this community are the only non-(*) Jewish group widely represented in the Israel Defense Forces. This group traces its origins to the Persian Hamza ibn Ali, and to al-Hakim, a Fatimid Caliph who vanished in 1021. Represented by a five-pointed star, this is, for 10 points, what offshoot of Shi'i Islam prominent in Israel, Syria, and Lebanon?", "Druze", "H"]
["In one story, this figure's eyes grow slanted from the sticks he once put under his eyes to stay awake all night; nevertheless, this figure awoke too late to take the name he wanted on the name-giving day. This being has the power to survive fatal wounds by hiding his vital organs inside his (*) tail. This figure once became the moon, but lost his position after he spied on the rest of the world. He created humans by rolling them out of balls of mud. For 10 points, name this canine trickster god in Native American mythology.", "Coyote", "H"]
["One matter considered at this event was whether bishops ordained by Melitius of Lycopolis would be allowed to retain their ordination, in addition to on what terms lapsed Christians could reenter the church. One compromise position adopted at this convention held was known as homoousis. Another question considered by this convention culminated in the adoption of a namesake creed; that question related to the relationship between the Father and the Son, contested between the Athanasians and the Arian heretics. For 10 points, name this first ecumenical council, convened in modern day Turkey.", "Council of Nicaea", "H"]
["On one holiday, these people commemorated the winter deer god shedding his horns by baking cakes in the shape of antlers. These people's healers were called ovates. In one ritual, priests of these people climbed an oak tree and sacrificed two white bulls. In one holiday of these people, Bel is reborn and impregnates his mother; that holiday is six months before their new year celebration, in which they (*) lit bonfires to celebrate the last harvest, called Samhain. These people worshipped the horse goddess Epona, and Julius Caesar described their priests practicing human sacrifice. For 10 points, name this Indo-European group, one branch of whom went from mainland Europe to the British Isles, whose priests were known as druids.", "Celts", "H"]
["One pope of this name promulgated the doctrine of \"the peace of Christ in the Kingdom of Christ,\" while another attacked the rule of the \"pretended Queen of England,\" Elizabeth I, in Regnans in Excelsis. A later pope of this name agreed to the Concordat of 1801, which re-established relations with France. Perhaps the most prominent pope of this name attacked modernism in the (*) Syllabus of Errors and invoked papal infallibility to proclaim the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception. That pope with this name was a \"prisoner of the Vatican\" during Italian Reunification. The twelfth man to take this name agreed to the Reichskonkordat and is sometimes accused of being \"Hitler's Pope.\" For 10 points, give this common name for these popes, including the longest-serving pope, the ninth.", "Pius", "H"]
["This figure apocryphally defended Jesus during his arrest by cutting off the ear of one of the Roman soldiers arresting him. During one Pentecost, this figure proclaimed the arrival of the Holy Spirit and gave an open-air sermon, and he was rescued from imprisonment by Herod by an angel. Traditionally depicted holding keys in his left hand, this saint, along with Paul, was the focus of the (*) Book of Acts, and he died by being crucified upside-down because he considered himself unworthy to die as Jesus had. For 10 points, name this figure who denied Christ three times after the Garden of Gesthemane, the leader of the Apostles who is considered to be the first pope.", "Saint Peter", "H"]
["Under certain circumstances, this practice can only be undertaken after a waiting period called an 'idda. Travelers make use of the misyar (mis-YAR) form of this practice, which can be ended by khula or talaq. It requires the arrangement of a mahr and a question and answer that must be repeated out loud three times. A mut'a (MUT-ah) is a controversial form of (*) temporary one that some Shi'ites can enter into for fixed time periods. The Qur'an requires a man to be equally just in order to do it more than once, which must have been a challenge for Muhammad because he did it eleven times. For 10 points, identify this practice that Islamic law permits other men to do only four times.", "Marriage", "H"]
["People in this work claim twice that \"the ear tastes arguments like the palate tastes food.\" The subject of a 35-volume commentary by Saint Gregory, the Moralia, its title figure gives a speech that mentions a mysterious \"Pit\" four times, and elsewhere in this text he originates the phrase \"by the skin of my teeth.\" Another speech references the first of God's creations, the river-drinking Behemoth, and asks if a fish-hook can lift Leviathan. Set in the land of Uz, this book features Elihu's speech after (*) Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar visit a man stricken by disease after a house collapsed on his seven sons and three daughters. For 10 points, name this poetic Biblical book in which Satan asks God to test the title wealthy man's piety with suffering.", "Book of Job", "H"]
["In a dream, this leader asked God for \"an understanding heart to judge Your people,\" and he purchased cypress and cedar from Hiram for one project. During the reign of his son, Samaria split off; that son was Rehoboam. Anointed by Zadok, writings attributed to this man include (*) Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs. One story states that he advised two prostitutes arguing over who was the mother of a baby to cut that baby in half. Because he was a man of peace, this leader was allowed to build the First Temple, unlike his father. For 10 points, name this wise King of Israel who welcomed the Queen of Sheba, the son of Bathsheba and Solomon.", "Joktan", "H"]
["After one of these events, Hindus take a cold bath with their clothes on. One of these occurred after Vishnu used his discus to behead a demon trying to steal the amrita; thus, these events are said to be caused by the demon Rahu. In China, people banged on drums and fired cannons during these events to frighten away the Dragon. Another of these events occurs after the horses Arvakr and Alvsior are caught. The serpent (*) Apep causes these in Egyptian myth. At Ragnarok, one of these events signals the final success of Skoll. For 10 points, name these celestial events, one of which occurs after a wolf devours the sun.", "Solar eclipse", "H"]
["One figure in this book has his seventy half-brothers killed for idolatry; that figure is the son of a man who asked God to prove himself via two opposite miracles on consecutive nights. Another leader in this book beats Sisera, a general of Jabin; that is Barak. Yet another figure in this book is ordered to dance for the entertainment of the (*) Philistines, but he brings down the pillars of the stadium with his temporarily regained incredible strength. Including the stories of Abimelech, Gideon, and Deborah as well as that of Delilah and Samson, for 10 points, name this biblical book following Joshua that tells of the rulers of the early post-Moses rulers of Israel.", "Book of Judges", "H"]
["The myth surrounding the birth of this figure holds that he was conceived when a white elephant touched his mother's side in a dream. After this figure's birth, the seer Asita predicted that he could become great in one of two ways. A sick man and a corpse were among the four sights that inspired this man, also known as (*) Shakyamuni, to become an ascetic. This man taught for the first time at the Deer Park in Benares, where he put forth the Four Noble Truths after meditating under a Bodhi tree and becoming enlightened. For 10 points, identify this Indian founder of an Asian religion whose sects include Theravada.", "Gautama Buddha", "H"]
["This religion encourages the practice of Nit-nem, in which certain banis are meant to be read daily, and its adherents undergo baptism by drinking water. Those who have been baptized are called amritdhari, become a part of the Khalsa, and are permitted to wear items known as the (*) \"Five K's,\" including kachera, referring to a specific type of cotton undergarment, kesh, and the kirpan, a curved dagger. Houses of worship in this religion, such as the Golden Temple, are known as gurdwaras, and its central religious text, compiled in the 1600s, is the Adi Granth. It has ten major holy figures, the last of which was Gobind Singh. For 10 points, identify this religion founded by Guru Nanak in the Indian state of Punjab.", "Sikhism", "H"]
["A lover refers to this figure \"guiding\" him, and Israfil bringing him light, in the Ba'hai text The Seven Valleys, and he begins a war among \"biters,\" fornicators, and children of the Watchers in the apocryphal Book of Enoch. This figure provided a winged mule-like creature, the buraq, for the Night Journey. He appeared in Jabal-al-Nour, a mountain containing the Hira cave, to narrate (*) ayats and met with Zachariah before that man's wife bore John the Baptist. For 10 points, name this figure who revealed the Qur'an to Muhammad, an Archangel who also spoke to Mary.", "Gabriel", "H"]
["According to a rabbinical source named for Zebediah, this man used the phrase \"bring the blood\" in Leviticus to argue that laymen could sacrifice animals. He delivered speeches at locations such as Mizpah and Gilgal, and after hearing the bleating of sheep, this man sliced King Agag into pieces. This son of Elkanah was trained until the age of 13 by a priest from Shiloh named Eli, and his spirit was briefly resurrected after death by the (*) Witch of Endor. He was born after intense nighttime prayers by Hannah, his previously barren mother. For 10 points, name this Judge and prophet who anointed Saul and King David, whose two namesake Biblical books precede First Kings.", "Samuel", "H"]
["Lehi found this on a rock after praying for his people's salvation. Lehi and Nephi hid behind this while hiding from the Lamanites. Abinadi was the first to be killed by this because of his belief in God. Absalom's servants used this to destroy Joab's barley. This can be found where the worm does not die and where those at the left-hand are sent. Daniel saw a man who had this instead of eyes. The sons of Aaron are priests in charge of guarding this. John the Baptist told his followers that one would come who would baptize them with this and the Holy Spirit. Ezekial saw a chariot surrounded by this, and the beast and the false prophet live in a lake of this. For 10 points, name this thing that makes the burning bush burn.", "Fire", "M"]
["One branch of this religious sect is the Zaidis. Members of this sect believe in eight practices in place of the five pillars. Another of its sects believes that Muhammad al-Mahdi is the twelfth imam, is alive and hidden, and will help Jesus bring the day of judgement. That sect, this religion's largest, is the Twelvers. Its adherents believe Ali was the true successor to Muhammad. Many adherents are found in Azerbaijan and Iraq, and it is the dominant religion in Iran. For 10 points, name this second largest branch of Islam after Sunni.", "Shia Islam", "M"]
["This figure told a farmer that although people have eighty-three problems, he can only help with the eighty-fourth. His mother, Maha Maya, dreamed of a six tusked white elephant when she conceived him. In Kapilavastu, this man was a Shakya prince. With his horse Kanthaka and his charioteer Channa, he saw a sick person, a corpse, and an ascetic. He sat underneath the Bodhi tree, where he was tempted by Mara. This figure said that \"life is suffering,\" one of his Four Noble Truths. For 10 points, name this \"Enlightened One,\" the founder of his namesake religion.", "Gautama Buddha", "M"]
["One of these incidents involving a Huguenot leader set off the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre. The shock of learning of one event of this type led to the death of Wenceslaus IV, prompting the Hussite Wars. The most famous one of these events saw the survival of two regents and a secretary in the employ of Emperor Matthias. That secretary gained the title von Hohenfall after landing in horse excrement during one of these events. For 10 points, name this type of event occurring twice in the history of Prague, the act of throwing a person out of a window.", "Defenestrations of Prague", "M"]
["Jacobus Arminius rejected some of this religion's main points at the Council of Dort, setting the basis for the split between this religion and Methodism. In Scotland, this religion developed into John Knox's Presbyterianism. Huldrych Zwingli influenced the early stages of this religion, whose reformation happened in Switzerland after the Lutheran Reformation. For 10 points, name this branch of Christianity whose five major tenets were outlined in its founder's Institutes of the Christian Religion and include total depravity and predestination.", "Calvinism", "M"]
["On the first day of this holiday, people create small footprints in rice flour and vermilion. On its last day, girls invite their brothers into their homes. Many businessmen who celebrate this holiday start their financial year on it. This celebration commemorates an exiled religious hero's defeat of the demon king Ravana, and lasts for 5 days between October and November. One of its practices is the offering of sweets to the goddess Lakshmi. The name of this holiday refers to the row of lamps that is lit during it. For 10 points, name this Hindu festival of lights.", "Diwali", "M"]
["One story from this collection concerns the ending of a drought by Honi the circle maker, who bargains with God for rain. The Babylonian part of this work includes the Bava Kamma and Bava Metzia. The first half of this collection has six orders, two of which are Nashim and Kodashim. Its two main parts are the Mishna and Gemarah. This work is known for its structure consisting of blocks of text surrounded by commentary. For 10 points, name this compilation of Jewish law and its Rabbinic commentary.", "Talmud", "M"]
["Some members of this religion approach God through repetition of his name and singing hymns of praise. All of its members are expected to wear a special undergarment and an iron bracelet at all times. These, along with carrying a wooden comb and a curved sword, and not cutting the hair, are the five K's of this religion. Members of Khalasa, the holy warriors of this religion, must undergo an initiation, after which they are rewarded with the surname Singh. This religion's center of worship is in the Golden Temple at Amritsar in Punjab. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["This figure outwitted Surasa and later killed the sorceress Kalanemi. His name refers to a scar on his chin from Indra's thunderbolt. Sometimes considered to be Vayu's son, this figure tore his chest open after being made fun of for taking apart a necklace. This son of Anjana strengthened Arjuna's chariot. After learning from Surya, this avatar of Shiva was cursed to forget his abilities. He saved Lakshmana's life by moving an entire mountain to find an herb, and later had his tail set afire. For 10 points, name this figure who decides to help Rama on his quest against Ravana, leaving his fellow monkeys.", "Hanuman", "M"]
["This group created settlements known as \"reductions\" in South America, where they resisted raids by slave traders. Its members must maintain four weeks of silence and take an oath of obedience that says white is black if a certain group wills it. This group's founder studied at the College de Montaigu of the University of Paris, and was wounded at the Battle of Pamplona. Some prominent members of this group were Matteo Ricci and Francis Xavier, who traveled to China and Japan as missionaries. It was founded by a former knight, Saint Ignatius of Loyola. For 10 points, name this largest Catholic order.", "Society of Jesus", "M"]
["According to Jewish tradition, two lines in this book form a separate book. One law presented in this book is a ritual slaughter of a red heifer for purification, and another is the threefold priestly benediction. Another law in this book is the law to put fringes, called tzitzit, on the corners of clothing. In this book, Moses sends 12 spies to scout out the land of Israel. This book's name comes from a census taken by Moses. For 10 points, name this fourth book of the Old Testament.", "Book of Numbers", "M"]
["In Maori mythology, the Milky Way was born from one of these creatures called Ikaroa. Aphrodite and Eros turned themselves into two of these creatures to escape Typhon. King Manu saved the constantly growing first avatar of Vishnu who was one of these animals. That creature, Matsya, saved enough people and animals to repopulate the world. Another of these animals is Namazu, who is restrained because he causes earthquakes when he thrashes. One of these animals ate nine hazelnuts and gained all the knowledge in the world before getting cooked by Finn McCool. For 10 points, name these aquatic animals exemplified by the Salmon of Wisdom.", "Fish", "M"]
["A commentary on this text was called the Ten Wings. This work contains messages such as \"Preponderance of the Great\" and \"Keeping Still, Mountain.\" It was revealed to Fu Xi, and was recorded by Wen of Zhou, who foresaw his own downfall in it. Its use involves either separating yarrow stalks or flipping three coins. This text contains a set of 64 statements each associated with a hexagram composed from eight trigrams or gua, each of which consists of three broken and unbroken lines, representing yin and yang respectively. For 10 points, name this ancient Chinese text and divination system, whose name means \"Book of Changes.\"", "I Ching", "H"]
["During the reign of Charles I, Archbishop Laud added this phrase to the Book of Common Prayer. Jesus is quoted as saying this phrase in the Book of Mormon, but whether the original text of the gospels quotes Jesus as saying this phrase is disputed. The first indisputable mention of this phrase is in a 2nd century text called the \"Didache,\" or \"Teaching of the Twelve Apostles\", from which it may have been interpolated into the Byzantine type text of the gospels. During a Catholic mass, after the priest recites the Embolism, this phrase is said by both the priest and the congregation. This line is notably absent from the oldest manuscripts of Matthew 6:13, where one of Jesus's followers asks how to pray. For ten points, give the name of or recite this sentence that Protestants, but not Catholics, add to the end of the Lord's Prayer, which praises the might and majesty of God.", "Doxology", "H"]
["This figure is often depicted accompanied by two torch-bearers known as Cautes and Cautopates. One of those attendants is thought to stand behind this figure as he aims his bow at a rock which the other kneels below with cupped hands, a scene known as the \"water miracle.\" Another common scene features this god, dagger in one hand and torch in the other, wearing only his Phrygian cap, and is known as the \"rock birth.\" In some cult sites, this figure is depicted dining or shaking hands with Sol, and, like Sol, this figure was often given the epithet invictus. A temple of this figure was known as a spelaeum in Italy and was often built into natural caves alluding to the location of this figure's most famous deed, the taurocthony. For 10 points, name this bull-slaying Roman god, derived from an Iranian deity, whose cult was popular among soldiers in the 1st through 4th centuries AD.", "Mithraism", "H"]
["The speaker of this work is told that he \"will stay a hyena\" by a figure with poppies. In one section of this work, the speaker equates a \"vision of purity\" with a \"crippling misfortune,\"and in another, the author states that he \"invented the color of the vowels\" and quotes some of his poetry from memory.", "A Season in Hell", "H"]
["This practice is credited with keeping one away from shameful and unjust deeds, according to verse 45 of The Spider. Namaz is the name given to it in Urdu. Al Ma'ida and An Nisa require travelers to perform tayammum prior to this action, which replaces ghusl or wudhu, because it uses sand or clean earth. It is forbidden to menstruating women because they are unable to achieve taharah. Jumu'ah is one example of this which replaces dhurh on Friday, and it occurs after the adhan is delivered by a muezzin. Jumu'ah is shortened to only two raka'at because it is followed by a khutbah or sermon. For 10 points name this action which must be proceeded by ritual ablution and performed 5 times daily, the second pillar of Islam, a term which refers to the prayer of Muslims.", "Salah", "H"]
["The last holder of this office to have any power as a result was Charles Falconer, who left office in 2007. This office was held by such men as William of Wykeham, who clashed with John of Gaunt during his tenure in this office at the end of Edward III's reign and beginning of Richard II's. Thomas Becket held this office, but he largely neglected it to focus on consolidating power and revenue under his other position of authority, Archbishop of Canterbury. A similar prejudice toward ecclesiastical wealth and power colored the tenure of Thomas Wolsey in this office, the chief symbol of which, the Great Seal of the Realm, he surrendered in 1529, after presiding over the expansion of the Court of Star Chamber in performance of this office. For ten points, name this great office of state, held after Wolsey by Saint Thomas More, who used it to burn both Protestant books and the heretics who wrote them.", "Lord Chancellor", "H"]
["This figure once used the timbers of a door frame he broke to destroy the bed of his poor host. That host later found four pots of treasure that had been buried beneath the bedposts. Siho, Saido, and this man once walked across the ocean to Singhala-Dipa, where he was carried to a palace by Shiv Nabha. Shiv Nabha and Chandkala later slaughtered their son and ate him at this man's bidding. After a religious experience in the Kali Bein, this figure once claimed that \"God is everywhere\" to justify sleeping with his feet facing the Ka'ba on his journey to Mecca. Two sets of flowers were placed with his body when he died in order to settle a dispute over whether to cremate or bury this man, each of which was advocated by one of the two groups of his followers. For 10 points, name this man who declared \"There is neither Hindu nor Muslim,\" and whose sayings are collected in the Adi Granth, the first guru of Sikhism.", "Guru Nanak", "H"]
["A section of this work recounting eighty inspired utterances includes the Blind From Birth chapter, in which one figure tells the story of blind men describing different parts of an elephant. That chapter is part of the Udana. A later portion of this work is named for its pairs of questions and is called the Yamaka, while a larger section is itself divided into five pieces known as \"collections,\" the first of which is the Digha Nikaya. Its Parivara section provides analysis on rules presented in its Suttavibhanga section which includes much of the Pattimokkha, a list of rules for monks and nuns. Those sections are part of its Vinaya part, which, along with the Sutta and Abhidhamma, is one of its sections known as the \"three baskets.\" For 10 points, name this text of Therevada Buddhism whose more common name refers to the extinct Indo-Aryan language in which it was written.", "Pali Canon", "H"]
["A speech by this man before the National Press Club declared a \"defensive perimeter\" running from the Aleutians through Japan to the Philippines, which Stalin and his puppet Kim Il Sung decided to test since it left Korea on the other side. A White Paper overseen by this man defended his predecessor's policy of refusing armed intervention in the Chinese civil war, arguing that it would have been fruitless to defend the regime of Chiang Kai-Shek. He was an early supporter of dismissing Douglas MacArthur from command of UN forces in Korea. Those stances earned him the ire of the red-baiting faction in the US Senate, and Joseph McCarthy waved around a list of 205 people under his authority, alleged \"card-carrying members of the Communist Party.\" For ten points, name this architect of the North Atlantic Treaty and of containment, Secretary of State during Truman's second term..", "Dean Acheson", "H"]
["The author of this work never names himself, leading many to dispute the authorship of this book, and the twenty-first chapter of this book is sometimes cited as the inspiration for the legend of the Wandering Jew. Chapters 1 through 12 of this book are often collectively known as the \"Book of Signs,\" and this book contains a section in which Jesus teaches the Pharisee Nicodemus. In the fourth chapter of this book, the people of a town in Samaria come to believe in Christ after Jesus tells a woman about her past. It begins by stating that \"in the beginning was the Word\" and that \"the Word was God\" and contains a verse sometimes called \"the Gospel in a nutshell\" that begins \"for God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son.\" For 10 points, name this book of the Bible that precedes Acts and follows Matthew, Mark, and Luke.", "Gospel of John", "H"]
["In one story about this figure, he kills Jambumalli and Akshaa, after which he is only able to escape the punishment devised by the brother of Vibheeshana with the help of a captive God who had assumed the role of cook. This figure had earlier outwitted Surasa and killed Simhika, although because of a curse placed on him, he first needed to be reminded of his abilities by Jambavan. His inability to identify Sanjivani, the herb prescribed by Sushena, causes him to lift the entire mountain Dunagiri and fly it back to the injured Lakshmana. On the way he is wounded by an arrow from Bharat, the brother of his greatest ally. Earlier he had traveled to Ravana's stronghold as a messenger to console Sita. For 10 points, name this son of the wind god Vayu who fought alongside Sugreeva at Lanka, the monkey ally of Rama.", "Hanuman", "E"]
["After this event, its subject may wear tefillin and be counted as part of a minyan, or prayer quorum. Its subject is called for his or her first aliyah, then reads from the weekly parsha, or Torah portion. Participants in this event are religiously considered (*) adults after completing this ritual at the age of 12 for girls or 13 for boys. For 10 points, name this coming-of-age ceremony where Jewish children become adults.", "Bar and Bat Mitzvah", "E"]
["Muktsah--thirty-nine forms of creative work--are prohibited on this day. At its opening, called kabbalat, this day is personified as a bride in the song \"L'kha Dodi.\" One smells spices and dips a twisted candle in wine at the end of this holiday, a ceremony called (*) Havdalah. This weekly event begins with lighting candles, saying kiddush, and eating challah at sundown on Friday. For 10 points, name this weekly Jewish day of rest.", "Shabbat", "E"]
["It states that no one should call his brother \"raca.\" It contains an injunction to \"let your yes be yes\" and recommends that if asked to go with a person one mile, to \"go with him two.\" Elsewhere, it makes a distinction between narrow and wide gates. It is the source of the (*) Lord's Prayer and the Golden Rule. For 10 points, name this speech from the book of Matthew containing the Beatitudes, that begins \"Blessed are the poor in spirit.\"", "Sermon on the Mount", "E"]
["This period sees observation of the delivery of the Gospels to Isa [ee-sah], and of the Torah to Moses. A juz' [jooz] is read every day of this period during the Tarawih [tah-rah-wee]. A meal at the end of each day in this period is called (*) Iftar. This month begins with the sighting of the new moon and concludes with celebration of Eid al-fitr [eed al-FIH-tur]. For 10 points, name this ninth and most holy month of the Islamic calendar where observers fast during the day.", "Ramadan", "E"]
["Adherents of this religion are called Khalsas [kall-sah's] after baptism, and obey the Rehat Maryada [re-HAT mar-YAH-dah]. Kesh is the name given to uncut hair that is usually covered by Dastaar, a turban worn by members of this religion, who take the names (*) Singh or Kaur. Ten gurus have led this religion, which follows teachings from the Adi Granth [ah-dee GRAHNTH]. For 10 points, name this Indian religion, originally led by Guru Nanak Dev, whose five K's include the kirpan.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["This figure tricked the Pharaoh and Abimelech by claiming his wife was his sister, and he negotiated against the destruction of Sodom for the sake of his nephew, Lot. This man was the father of (*) Ishmael with Hagar before his 90-year-old wife bore him a son through a promise from God. For 10 points, identify this husband of Sarah and father of Isaac, the namesake of a group of religions that includes Islam and Christianity.", "Abraham", "E"]
["Items that follow these laws very closely may be called \"glatt,\" while items that violate them are called \"trayf.\" Neutral foods under them are called \"parev\" and include fish, which must have fins and scales; therefore, (*) shellfish are not permitted under these laws, which demand the separation of meat and dairy foods. Animals must have cloven hooves and chew cud to be eaten by subscribers to, for 10 points, what set of Jewish dietary laws that forbid the consumption of pork?", "Jewish apple cake", "E"]
["This event begins with six intermediate states called bardo, but this process no longer occurs when a person reaches moksha. Through this process, the Bodhisattva of Compassion now manifests as Tenzin Gyatso, the fourteenth (*) Dalai Lama. The conditions of this event are dictated by karma. Occurring after death, for 10 points, name this Indian religious concept, in which the soul returns to a new body.", "Reincarnation", "E"]
["This religion's Kitab-i-Iqan [kee tahb-ee-ee kahn] relates this religion's teachings to both Islam and Christianity, and is better known as the Book of Certitude. Shoghi Effendi [sho-gee eff-EN-dee] was Guardian of this religion in the twentieth century. This religion believes in the (*) unity of all faiths, and its Manifestations of God include Zoroaster, Krishna, Christ, Mohammad, and the Bab [bahb]. For 10 points, identify this religion founded in Persia by Baha\u201fu\u201fllah [ba HAH-oo-lah].", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["This man's sayings were documented in the Agam Sutras. This successor of Parshva's mother had dreams of a four-tusked white elephant and of a full moon before he was born. This man had a cycle of 26 births before being born into his newest form. During this man's life, he preached the absence of absolute truth, anekantavada, along with other principles about truth and [*] nonviolence. Symbolized by a lion, this advocate of the principles of satya and ahimsa was the 24th and last tirthankara (\"THEER-thunk-uh-ra\"). For 10 points, name this man, the founder of Jainism.", "Mahavira", "M"]
["This book's introduction explains the intent as providing an orderly account for Theophilus. This work's genealogy of Jesus extends back to Adam. This religious work includes a parable in which a Jewish traveler is beaten up and left alone by a priest and Levite, until a [*] Samaritan comes by. This Gospel includes a story in which a son squanders his birthright, but returns to a celebration from his father. Including the parable of the Prodigal Son, for 10 points, name this third canonical gospel written by the patron saint of surgeons that lies between Mark and John.", "Gospel of Luke", "M"]
["To fully experience a temple in this religion, one must affirm his belief in tithing and confession to a priest, in a process called \"temple recommend.\" This religion teaches \"Selections from the Book of Moses\" and \"The Book of Abraham,\" which are part of The Pearl of Great Price. This religion's text describes a group of settlers of [*]North America called Nephites, and the last priest of those Nephites was Moroni. Its canon is made up of a book translated from Golden Plates, and some fundamentalists of this religion still support polygamy. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Joseph Smith and led by Brigham Young to Utah.", "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints", "M"]
["This holiday sees the singing of the Chad Gadya, and some observants use an orange to represent support for women rabbis. Along with Sukkot, this holiday includes days designated Chol HaMoed. The [*] haggadah for this holiday lays out the Ma Nishtana, or Four Questions, which concern reclining, double-dipping, and the eating of maror and matzah, which is not chametz, and ask \"Why is this night different from every other night?\" Celebrated with the seder, for 10 points, name this holiday commemorating God's sparing of the Jews from the Angel of Death.", "Passover", "M"]
["Under this belief, the urvan is united with a fravashi, or guardian, before life and four days after death in order to collect its mortal experiences for the conflict in the spirit world. This religion emphasizes deeds and actions, and thus asceticism is looked down upon because it is fleeing from the experiences of life, which is the purpose of the urvan. Followers of this religion believe that the dead should be exposed to the elements and thus build [*] \"Towers of Silence\". This religion's doctrine is written in the Avesta and believes in an ongoing war between Angra Mainyu and Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this Persian dualistic religion named for its prophetic founder.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["The main temple to this deity is torn down every twenty years to be rebuilt in its original form and is named Ise-Jingue. Also known as Tensho Daijan, this figure gave a sword, a previous gift from a brother, to a grandson in order to pacify and rule the land. This goddess saw herself in a [*] mirror for the first time after her brother threw a flayed horse into her weaving room which caused her to seclude herself from the world. This entity's descendant Jimmu was given three proofs of divine right when he became emperor of the land. Brother to Susanoo and Tsukiyomi, for 10 points, this is what Shinto sun goddess.", "Amaterasu", "M"]
["According to the Baha'i faith, this figure's forty to seventy-two followers were the only ones who were spiritually alive in the world. In Gnosticism, this figure saved more than just himself and his family and resided in a luminous cloud. He cursed one of his grandsons, [*] Canaan, to be the \"lowest of slaves\" to his brothers because that grandson's father, Ham, saw him naked. After sending out a raven and a dove, this man made a covenant with God to prevent another omnicide from occurring again. For 10 points, name this biblical figure who survived a great flood by building an ark.", "Noah", "M"]
["In preparation for this action, men are to dress in only two sheets of white unhemmed cloth called an ihram. On the first day of this action, tawaf occurs. Other parts of this action involve drinking water in order to represent Hagar's struggle to find water for Ishmael from the [*] Zamzam Well and staying on Mt. Arafat for an afternoon. In Mina, participants in this action \"stone the devil.\" The most important part of this event involves walking seven times around the Ka'bah. For 10 points, name this pillar of Islam that Muslims must do at least once in a lifetime that involves a pilgrimage to Mecca.", "Hajj", "M"]
["The Mesopotamian god of this type was Yamm. Another one of this type of god had nine daughters and held a feast where Loki mocked the gods. That god of this type was Aegir. The crocodile-headed Sobek was one of these gods in Egyptian mythology. In Chinese myth, Gong Gong held this role and quarreled with the spirit of [*] fire, Jurong. The Hindu god of this type is Varuna, and in Greek myth Proteus was an ancient one of these gods who herded seals. For 10 points, name this type of god, examples of which include Oceanus and Poseidon.", "List of water deities", "M"]
["Hur raised this figure's arms to ensure victory over the Amalekites. This figure's sister was cursed with leprosy for scolding his marriage to an Ethiopian, and that sister sang the \"Song of the Sea,\" proclaiming God as \"gloriously triumphant.\" This man's sister was [*] Miriam, and his brother possessed a blossoming staff. Talking face-to-face with God caused this prophet's face to become radiant, after which he discovered Aaron's construction of the Golden Calf. After forty years of travels, this prophet died atop Mt. Nebo after seeing the Promised Land. For 10 points, name this Biblical figure who received the Ten Commandments and led the Israelite exodus from Egypt.", "Moses", "M"]
["In this work, the mother of the sheep is given eagle wings to flee a dragon, who eventually spews water to drown her and her child. The narrator of this work hears a voice say, \"I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last\" before addressing seven churches in Asia. In the eighth and ninth chapters of this book, a third of the world is [*] destroyed after the trumpeting of an angel. In its sixth chapter, after each seal was broken, a horseman riding forth on a unique color would appear. Believed to have been authored by John of Patmos, for 10 points, name this Biblical book that describes the onset of the apocalypse and the conflict between Satan and Jesus Christ.", "Metropolis of Pergamon", "M"]
["After defeating an invading force from Mesopotamia that kidnapped his nephew, this man was blessed by the king of Salem, named Melchizedek. Because of his wife's beauty, he lied that they were siblings, which caused both Pharoah and Abilimech to try to marry her. This man died five years early to be spared of the pain of seeing the sale of his grandson Esau's birthright. This man's wife was infertile so he laid with his handmaiden Hagar. For 10 points, name this Biblical figure who almost sacrificed his son Isaac to God on Mount Horeb and whose name means \"father of many nations,\" the patriarch of Islam, Christianity, and Judaism.", "Abraham", "M"]
["One creature in this people's myth system is a small red vampire who ingests and then regurgitates its victims, called the Yara-ma-yha-who, and the first child in this myth system was made by his parents from clay before being placed head-first into his mother and experiencing growth. This people used a (*) \"bone pointing\" ceremony to kill from afar and practice fire-stick farming. The son of one prominent figure in this myth system is Binbeal, who retaliated against his brother for refusing to move to his domain by setting that brother Balayang's land on fire. In addition to the figure of Bunjil the Eaglehawk, this myth system includes a tree that is upside-down with its roots in the air. For 10 points, name this myth system that venerates the Rainbow Serpent, a native Australian faith that is centered around the Dreamtime.", "Ningaui", "M"]
["The Mishnah Tractate Berakhot includes a story about Rabbi Gamliel's recitation of the Shema after performing this action, even though he was exempt, while another Rabbinical ruling about this action says that men may perform it on the Sabbath if they have never done so before. This action sees the recitation of the Sheva Brachot, and after this action, the provisions of (*) shalom bayit should be observed. The taboo of negiah no longer applies to the this action, which may be reversed by a get, while the document produced during the performance of this action is written in Aramaic instead of Hebrew and is called a Ketubah. Traditionally performed under a chuppah, for 10 points, name this action during which a veil traditionally masks the face of the bride.", "Wedding", "M"]
["Verse 1:27 of this work features an account of God's wrath against a sinful humanity engaging in unnatural homosexual acts. It features the claim that the Jews will be saved and that \"the wage of sin is death but the gift of God is eternal life.\" Catholics point to chapter two of this work as evidence of (*) works as necessary for salvation rather than faith alone, although it was essential for Martin Luther's formulation of faith alone This is also the title of the first work of the Swiss theologian Karl Barth. For 10 points, name this work transcribed by Tertius, the longest Pauline epistle, which comes after Acts in the New Testament and was addressed to members of a certain Italian city.", "Epistle to the Romans", "M"]
["One publication by this group likens the small minority for which this group does not speak to the third of humanity that it believes will be killed following a thermonuclear attack on New York City. The architect of this group's current executive structure died shortly before the culmination of the Ten Year Crusade, which was completed by the Hands of the Cause. This faith regards as illegitimate the followers of Charles Mason Remey, who himself was declared a (*) covenant breaker for claiming to be an eligible successor to the only one in their tradition to hold the title of \"Guardian.\" That man, Shoghi Effendi, laid the basis for the modern leadership of this religion based on the tenets put forth in the Book of Certitude. For 10 points, identify this faith whose current dogma is thusly governed by the Haifa-based Universal House of Justice, a religion founded by Baha'u'llah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["This group had its origins in Hiram Edson's interpretation of a certain religious text, and Ellet Waggoner and Alonzo Jones challenged this group's belief in sola scriptura, holding instead that salvation came from grace. The visions of Ellen Harmon were used by James White to organize this religious group, and those visions were also believed to have validated this denomination's sanctuary, shut-door, and (*) \"sabbattarian\" doctines. This denomination's founder used the Book of Daniel to predict that 2300 years after Artaxerxes ordered the rebuilding of Jerusalem, a \"second awakening,\" would occur; the failure of this to take place was known as this denomination's \"great disappointment.\" For ten points, identify this Christian denomination founded based on the teachings of William Miller, whose name suggests the unique day on which they observe the Sabbath.", "Seventh-day Adventist Church", "M"]
["This figure erected a stone memorial at Eben-Ezer to commemorate God's help at Mizpah. The Berakhot claims that this man was the first to justify sacrifices made by non-priests. While pregnant with him, this man's mother was mistaken for drunk by a priest of Shiloh who later became this man's mentor. This son of Elkanah was called three times by while asleep in the temple by a voice he thought was that mentor, (*) Eli. This man gave a speech at Gilgal that warned against idolatry of kings before he predicted the results of the Battle of Mount Gilboa when he was resurrected by the Witch of Endor at the behest of Saul. For 10 points, name this last Judge of Israel and prophet who anointed both Saul and David King of Israel.", "Samuel", "M"]
["In Orphism, this being is believed to have killed Zagreus who would later be reincarnated as Dionysus. This figure's death was preceded by him cutting out Zeus's sinews and imprisoning him in the Coryican cave. Instead of fingers, this being had fifty dragon heads on each of his hands, and vipers instead of legs. The last child of (*) Tartarus and Gaia, this largest creature in Greek mythology stood as high as the heavens. The Lernaean Hydra, Nemean Lion, Sphynx, and Cerberus were all offspring of his with his wife, Echidna. Zeus eventually defeated this being by throwing the island of Sicily on top of him, trapping him beneath Mount Etna. For ten points, name this fearsome monster from Greek mythology whose influence over strong storm winds is the etymology for a pacific hurricane.", "Typhon", "M"]
["Initiates in this religion face a probation period of six months, and one vow taken by new members asserts an understanding that failure to uphold this religion's regulations will result in \"extermin[ation] by Heaven and Earth.\" This religion mandates four daily ceremonies starting at 6AM and occurring every six hours. This religion sees itself as the third and final Religious (*) Amnesty offered by God, the previous two of which included faiths that are grouped into such categories as the Doctrine of the Sages, the Doctrine of the Genies, and the Doctrine of the Buddhas. Though it is not Catholicism, this religion's structure consists of Archbishops and a Pope, and its name literally translates to \"High Tower.\" FTP, name this syncretic Vietnamese religion whose saints notably include Sun Yat-sen and Victor Hugo.", "Cao Dai", "M"]
["During this event, Satan is said to be chained so that any cruel comments or sins are definitively the responsibility of the person performing them, and participants in this event may be exempted from one notable practice by donating food to a poor person. This event sees the celebration of the Night of Power, as well as the recitation of additional prayers called (*) Tarawih, and some participants in this event may sponsor large banquets for the poor called mawaed al-rahman. This holiday sees engagement in the practice of sawm, an observance which is set between the meals of suhoor and iftar. Commemorated at its end by Eid-al-Fitr, FTP name this ninth month of the Islamic calendar that sees daily fasts.", "Ramadan", "M"]
["This poem describes a pagan ritual in which \"a ring of men\" chant to their \"savage source\" and so that \"out of their blood,\" they will \"return to the sky.\" In another section. the speaker wonders if \"our blood should fail [...] or [...] come to be the blood of paradise.\" The narrator claims \"death is the mother of beauty\" when the poem's main subject says that beauty is transitory. That subject wonders \"what is (*) divinity if it can come / only in silent shadows and dreams?\" It begins with a woman in her peignoir eating oranges and drinking coffee. For 10 points, name this poem from the collection Harmonium about a women's search for spiritual fulfillment in the Christian faith while skipping church on Easter, written by Wallace Stevens.", "Sunday Morning", "M"]
["During the thirteen day calender sign Ce Miquiztli it was important to pray to this god so that wealth, power, and good health were not taken away. That same period of time was also a great time to be a slave because masters were bestow gifts unto them and take better care of them, as slaves were seen as the children of this god. In one story, this god comes down on spider webs to vex his (*) brother, forcing him to leave Tula. When that same brother overthrew this god's rule, this god transformed into Tepeyollotl, a jaguar and destroyed the world. In another tale, this god and his brother created earth from the giant ocean dwelling creature Cipactli, an action which resulted in this god losing his foot and replacing it with and a piece of obsidian. FTP, name this Aztec god called \"Smoking Mirror\" who helped create and who ruled the first world and fought with his brother Queztacoatl", "Tezcatlipoca", "M"]
["After this figure is calmed by the music of a minstrel, he orders a series of ditches to be built that are filled with water despite a lack of rain. This man cleanses the waters of Jericho with salt, and he cuts a stick and throws it into a river, causing an iron axe-head to float. He tells the general Naaman to wash seven times in the Jordan River, healing him of his leprosy. When this man is (*) mocked by forty-two youths, he summons two female bears which maul and kill them. He orders the anointing of Jehu as rightful king against Ahab, and this prophet also helps a widow escape the clutches of a creditor by multiplying her supply of oil. He slaughters the oxen he is plowing with when he is called by his predecessor, a man he later watches ascend to heaven in a fiery chariot. For 10 points, name this subject of First and Second Kings, a disciple of the similarly named Elijah.", "Elisha", "M"]
["During the festival of Shavuot, a hymn to this figure is recited describing this figure's battle with the \"ox,\" and according to a Jewish prayer, \"from the beautiful skin of [this figure], God will construct canopies to shelter the righteous.\" In Canaanite legend, this (*) creature is referred to as Lotan, and is said to have been slain by Baal. It originally had a mate, but that mate was killed to protect the world from this creature's offspring. Thomas Aquinas described this creature as the demon of envy, and the Book of Job states that \"when he rises up, the mighty are terrified; they retreat before his thrashing,\" and asks \"Can you pull in [this creature] with a fishhook?\" FTP, name this giant sea monster from the Old Testament, whose name also provides the title of a philosophical work by Thomas Hobbes.", "Leviathan", "H"]
["In Bahai'sm, this person is the namesake of the Cycle of Prophecy, which began around six thousand years ago and preceded the current Cycle of Fulfillment. Joseph Smith claimed that this figure lived in Jackson County, Missouri, and an accepted LDS doctrine holds that he was the archangel Michael in his former life. A controversial disavowed position held by Brigham Young espoused that this being sat on a heavenly throne and fathered Jesus. In the Qur'an, Iblis becomes Satan and is expelled from heaven after refusing to bow to this figure, who fathers Habil and Qabil. In Jewish tradition, this father of (*) Seth is asked \"Where art thou\" and is told \"dust thou art, and unto dust thou return.\" For 10 points, name this man tasked with naming the animals, the husband of Eve who lives in the Garden of Eden.", "Adam", "H"]
["In this sect, offerings of a mirror, cloth and flower are among the Offerings of the Five Senses, which are distinguished from the eight gifts presented as external offerings. Both sets of offerings include the unbaked gtor-ma cake, which can be shaped like a human to warn off the \"wrathful detities\" like Mahakala. Traditionally, this sect was founded by Guru Rimpoche, who incorporated many aspects of the (*) Bon folk religion. This sect was reformed by Atisa and his disciple Brom-ston, and most of its adherents today are Yellow Hats. An infant can become the leader of this sect by recognizing the possessions of his predecessor. This sect is centered at the Potala Palace and adapts many practices from Vajrayana or Tantric Buddhism. For 10 points, name this sect of Buddhism practiced by the Dalai Lama.", "Tibetan Buddhism", "H"]
["One legend explains three and a half golden nails in this building by claiming that there were once nineteen, and that when the devil removes them all, the world will end. Another myth claims that a part of this structure used to be suspended in air, as it attempted to ascend to heaven and was held down by the angel Gabriel. This building was constructed by Abd al-Malik, and contains a small cave called the \"well of souls,\" which is covered by the Foundation Stone. In Jewish tradition, this building marks the spot where (*) Abraham nearly sacrificed Isaac. For Muslims, it marks the site where the flying horse Buraq carried Muhammad so that he could ascend into heaven. For 10 points, name this octagonal building on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem which is often named for its golden roof.", "Dome of the Rock", "H"]
["In the Quran, Allah answers Abraham's queries about resurrection by telling him to train four of these animals and put them on separate hills. In another verse, Allah sends these animals bearing three stones each to defeat the People of the Elephants. Leviticus suggests curing leprosy by dipping a living one of these animals in the blood of a dead one. Mary took advantage of the Jewish law allowing those who cannot afford a lamb to sacrifice two of them. God sends one species of this animal to feed a starving (*) Elijah. In the Gospels, Jesus drives the sellers of these animals out of the temple. One of them appears during the baptism of Jesus, and another of them returns with an olive branch after Noah sends it out to see if the flood has subsided. For 10 points, name these animals which creationists insist did not descend from dinosaurs.", "Bird", "H"]
["On this holiday in 1212, Francis of Assisi initiated his follower St. Clare into monastic life. A processional hymn used on this holiday was first sung by the imprisoned bishop Theodulphus from his window. On the Orthodox calendar, this holiday falls on the day after the feast of Lazarus. Many hymns performed on this day reference the cries of (*) \"Hosanna, blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.\" Traditionally, ritual objects used during this holiday are burnt up to make the ashes for the next year's Ash Wednesday. It commemorates a biblical story in which the disciples wrap their cloaks over a donkey so that Jesus can make his triumphal entry into Jerusalem. This is the first day of Holy Week and always falls on the Sunday before Easter. For 10 points, name this Christian holiday named for the green leafy fronds which are traditionally waved.", "Palm Sunday", "H"]
["An adherent can avoid participating in one type of this event by performing a ceremony in which he loosens the \"hazilah\" shoe and spits on the ground. Before these events, participants can chant from scripture in a rite called \"aufruf.\" Originally divided into two parts called the erusin and nissuin, these events include the recital of the \"seven blessings\" or \"sheva brachot.\" They take place under a (*) canopy called a \"chuppah,\" and their result can be reversed with a \"get.\" Traditions during these events include the breaking of a glass and the dancing of the Hava Nagila, in which the choson and the kallah hold onto a handkerchief and are carried around on chairs. For 10 points, name this ceremony which commemorates the joining of two souls for an Abrahamic religion.", "Jewish wedding", "H"]
["One story relates how Queen Victoria grew nervous upon reading of this man's prediction about a Pipal tree sapling growing as large as a Jand tree. Another story relates how this man's birth caused the Muslim mystic Bhikan Shah to pray towards the east instead of the west. As an infant, this man proved his impartiality by picking between two bowls of sweets. On the holiday of Vaisakhi, this man took (*) five men into his tent, emerging each time with a bloody sword, before revealing that he had been stabbing animals. He ascended to his highest post when his father Tegh Bahadur was martyred by Aurangzeb. He used a ceremony involving Amrit to initiate the Khalsa, and appointed the Adi Granth his successor. For 10 points, name this tenth Sikh Guru.", "Guru Gobind Singh", "H"]
["These buildings have different effects on different people depending on whether the land they are built on is colored white, red, yellow, or black, and whether it tastes sweet, sour, bitter or astringent. They are often built after the land is plowed and a seed is seen growing healthily. Before they can be used, there must be two ceremonies to pacify a malevolent spirit which is thought to have appeared when a drop of sweat landed on the earth. They are often built around cave-like \"womb rooms\" and support shikara towers. In these structures, adherents can eat consecrated food called (*) prasada after offering it to a deity. These buildings are home to divine images called murtis, and worship inside of them can be referred to as puja. For 10 points, name these buildings where one would worship Shiva or Brahma.", "Hindu temple", "H"]
["The warrior queen Mavia forced Valens to appoint a man of this name as the first Arab bishop of the Arabs. One man with this name swam across the Nile with a knife in his mouth, stole four rams, and ate them in one sitting. That monk of this name had the epithet \"the Black\" and improbably became a nonviolent saint after defending his monastery from brigands. During the Night Journey, another figure with this name is credited with getting the number of daily prayers reduced from fifty to five. That man with this name appears with (*) Elijah on Mount Tabor during the Transfiguration of Jesus. That man brings forth water by striking a rock with his staff and is succeeded as leader of the Israelites by Joshua. For 10 points, name this man who parted the Red Sea and witnessed the Burning Bush.", "Moses", "H"]
["Shinto funeral rites are influenced by the story of Amewakahiko, whose death was mourned with ritual singing and dancing for this period of time. Mahakasyapa, the man who understood the Flower Sermon, was revered for only needing this much time to become an Arhat. A contentious Islamic theological debate concerns contradictions in the Qur'an over whether the creation occurred in six days or in this amount of time. Jesus Christ was at this age when he met Simeon and Anna at the temple. This is the length of time that must pass after his birth before a (*) Jewish boy is circumcised. In a miraculous instance, the Maccabees witnessed a lamp with enough oil to last for one day only actually keep burning for this period of time. For 10 points, name this length of time taken up by Hanukkah.", "Eight Days", "M"]
["One early leader of this religion, who gave the \"Salt Sermon,\" was Sidney Rigdon. Males in this religion can enter the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods. One book sacred to this religion contains the vision of the Tree of Life and an account of the wars between the Lamanites and the Nephites. Members of this religion were driven out of Nauvoo, Illinois. Its founder was told by the angel Moroni where to find the gold plates that he translated into their namesake book. For 10 points, name this religion whose early leaders include Brigham Young and Joseph Smith, many of whom currently live in Utah.", "Mormonism", "M"]
["This man's wife circumcised his first son during a stay at an inn; that son was Gershom. This man had a speech impediment from a time he put a hot coal to his mouth instead of a piece of gold. He was punished with premature death after striking a rock for water. This figure's wife was one of seven sisters who met him at a well in Midian; that wife was Zipporah, the son of Jethro. His sister was Miriam, and his brother, the high priest Aaron, led this man's people in making a golden calf while he was away. For 10 points, name this Biblical figure who received the Ten Commandments on Mt. Sinai and parted the Red Sea as leader of the Jews during the Exodus.", "Moses", "M"]
["A hymn to this figure, \"Ut queant laxis,\" gave rise to the solfege syllables. According to Luke, this figure's mother was \"of the daughters of Aaron\" and either cousin or aunt to Mary. That woman, Elizabeth, was the wife of this figure's father, the priest Zechariah. This figure called himself \"the voice of one crying out in the wilderness\", and said of Jesus, \"I knew him not\", and he also called Jesus the lamb of God. At the bidding of her mother Herodias, Salome asked for this figure's head on a dish, and Herod Antipas obliged. Sometimes called \"the Precursor\", for 10 points, name this man who got his epithet from ritually bathing people in the Jordan River, including Jesus Christ.", "John the Baptist", "M"]
["One early extension of these texts includes the Panchavimsha. Each of these texts contains a set of doctrines meant to be studied in a deserted forest, known as the \"Book of the Wilderness.\" The \"going of the cows\" ceremony is described in the aforementioned extension of these. Each of them is broken up into a collection of hymns, a Samhita; and exegetical sections including the Brahmana. This set of works is grouped into the \"threefold knowledge\" and the last part, the Atharva one. The main portion of these texts is extended in the Upanishads. For 10 points, name these Sanskrit texts which serve as the foundation for Hindu doctrine, the oldest of which is the Rig.", "Vedas", "M"]
["This work distinguishes between a substance and a subsistence, saying that the human soul is the latter because it is incomplete without a body. This work's author rejects the Pluralist argument in saying that humans are uniquely rational beings, while angels and God are intelligent but not rational. Uncompleted at its author's death, this work's Supplement was taken from parts of its author's commentary on Peter Lombard's Sentences. This work contains arguments from motion, efficient causes, possibility and necessity, gradation of being, and design, the so-called quinque viae, or Five Ways to prove God's existence. For 10 points, name this magnum opus of Thomas Aquinas.", "Summa Theologiae", "M"]
["One version of this religion imagined the Plain of High Heaven where deities lived, while another included the \"Perpetual Country\" beyond the seas. Inner sanctuaries in this religion often feature carefully wrapped mirrors representing deities. In this religion's creation story, a husband and wife created land from drops off a jewel-encrusted spear used to stir brine. Coming in Folk, Sect, and Shrine varieties, this religion's shrines have gateways called torii. Believers worship over 800 natural spirits called kami. The Grass-Cutting Sword and the goddess Amaterasu come from, for 10 points, the myth of what indigenous religion of Japan?", "Shinto", "M"]
["After settling in Gerar, this man mirrored his father's actions in claiming that his wife was his sister so that the king of the Philistines would not kill him for her beauty. Eliezer of Damascus found this man's wife after she fetched water for Eliezer's camels. This man's brother-in-law Laban employed his son as a shepherd. He almost died during the akedah on Mount Moriah. In his blind old age, this man blessed his younger son, who gave him venison. This figure had a half-brother whose mother was Hagar, and his mother was Sarah. For 10 points, name this husband of Rebecca who fathered the twins Jacob and Esau and whom his father Abraham almost sacrificed.", "Isaac", "M"]
["The travels of this religion's founder with his companion Mardana, are related in the Puratan tradition. Adherents sing the nine hymns of the Sodar at sundown. The most sacred place in this religion sits in the middle of a lake enlarged by Ram Das. This religion's holiest text was appointed its eternal leader by its final human leader, Gobind Singh. This religion's followers wear the Five Ks, including the kirpan, a ceremonial sword, and worship at the Golden Temple at Amritsar. For 10 points, name this religion which was founded by the author of the Adi Granth, Guru Nanak, an Indian religion whose male adherents are often named Singh and wear turbans.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["The Haftarah starting at Zechariah 2:14 is read on this holiday. One song connected with this holiday is a round with the drawn-out word \"Shma\" and is entitled \"Mi YeMalel\", while another is the \"Hanerot Hallalu\" blessing. The shamash is a helper for the main ceremony of this holiday. In Israel, the letter Pey, instead of Shin, accompanies Nun, Gimel, and Hey on a top used in a game on this holiday, which also involves the singing of the Ma'oz Tzur, or Rock of Ages. Beginning on the 25th of Kislev, it commemorates a revolt by the Maccabees and includes a candle-lighting ceremony for eight nights. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday known as the \"Festival of Lights\".", "Hanukkah", "M"]
["One of this man's works quotes the Aeneid to prove that gods can be conquered. That work begins with ten books attacking paganism and adopts Varro's conception of theology. He wrote a religious imitation of Cicero's Orator called De doctrina christiana. He spent most of his last twenty years attacking Pelagianism. One of his works contrasts the title entity, which contains virtuous men and angels, with a similar one \"of Man.\" In one work, he describes how he rejected Manichaeism and how he was read neo-Platonist works by St. Ambrose of Milan. For 10 points, name this bishop from Hippo who wrote the City of God and the autobiographical Confessions.", "Augustine of Hippo", "M"]
["Many of this religion's main figures reached moksha on the mountain Sametshikharji. This religion performs sacred rituals at derasars, including reciting a mantra which ends \"Padhamam Havei Mangalam,\" the Navkar Mantra. Members of one sect of this religion sweep ahead of where they walk and wear cloth over the mouth to avoid trampling and ingesting insects, while another group does not even own clothes and are called \"sky-clad,\" or Digambaras. It was founded by its 24th \"ford-maker\", or Tirthankara, Mahavira. For 10 points, name this Indian religion whose five core principles include ahimsa, the protection of all life.", "Jainism", "H"]
["Leonard Howell set forth six fundamental principles for this religion. One sect of this religion believes that each member of the religion is a member of one of twelve houses and was founded by Vernon Carrington. Branches of this religion are known as \"mansions.\" Important texts in this religion include The Holy Piby and The Kebra Nagast. This religion's slang is called Iyaric and \"I-and-I\" is used to refer to the oneness of God. Worshippers are forbidden from eating pork, shellfish, and red meat, because they make the body a cemetery. That diet is called I-tal and practitioners of this religion are exiles from Babylon. Adherents to this religion believe that Haile Selassie is Jah and try to expel corruption from their bodies by smoking ganja. For 10 points, name this religion popular in Jamaica.", "Rastafari", "H"]
["A tabular summary of this work in Delaune's Epitome provided the basis for the \"Hundred Aphorisms.\" This work's third book contains a refutation of Osiander's doctrine of \"essential righteousness,\" arguing in part from the author's belief that justification comes from the secret or internal agency of the Holy Spirit. Its first book singles out Servetus in its discussion of contemporary Anti-Trinitarians, and the various editions of this work include an address with a \"Plea for the persecuted evangelicals,\" written to Francis I. In addition to the prefatory plea on behalf of the Huguenots, this work includes discussions of a group known as the elect to illustrate the author's concept of predestination. For 10 points, name this major work of John Calvin.", "Institutes of the Christian Religion", "H"]
["According to tradition, it must be 12 lines and must fill the margins exactly. Additionally, the letter \"lamed\" [lahm-ed] must appear in every line, and other specific letters must be enlarged. It is always written with a quill or a reed, and must be composed under the observation of two witnesses. According to commentator Shiltei Giborim [Shill-tay gibb-or-im], the word for it comes from a type of quartz said to have anti-magnetic properties. The actions of the paranoid Isaac Neiberg resulted in one example which was immortalized as the Cleves version. Due to its Orthodox requirements, missing persons and the mentally ill create a class of persons known as an \"agunah.\" For 10 points, identify this document which requires the consent of the man and facilitates the Jewish ritual of divorce.", "Get (divorce document)", "H"]
["Its namesake society was founded in 1875 and its offshoots include the Temple of the People created in California by William Dower and Francia LaDue. Another member founded the Central Hindu College in Benares where she wrote the volume Karma. That woman predicted the arrival of a \"World Teacher.\" Heavily influenced by the vision of God as an undifferentiated \"Absolute,\" its other beliefs include the idea that 4 dimensions exist and the transmigration of souls. In a treatise subtitled \"Anthropogenesis,\" its greatest exponent pondered \"Are Giants Fiction?\" and asserted that man was the \"third logos.\" That work was called The Secret Doctrine and it was a follow up to her Isis Unveiled. For 10 points, identify this pantheistic religious system, named for the Greek for God and wisdom, and usually associated with Madame Blavatsky", "Theosophy", "H"]
["According to Theodoret's account of his life, he wore on his body a heavy iron chain and he bent down so that his forehead almost touched his feet. Early on he lived in a cave, where he spent the entire period of Lent abstaining from food. His similarly named son would go on to establish a monastery at what was later called \"The Hill of Wonders.\" Women were generally not permitted beyond the double wall that was built near his \"Mandra.\" Indeed, he refused to see his mother, St. Martha, until she passed away and her body was brought to him. Celebrated by the Orthodox Church on September 1, his followers included Daniel, who lived for 33 years near Constantinople in the mode of this man, a Syrian who received visitors at the holy site he erected at Mount Teleanissae via a ladder. For 10 points, identify this Christian saint who is named for the pillar on which he lived and preached.", "Saint Simeon", "H"]
["This thinker stressed the incompatibility of the theater and the house of worship and theorized on the Apostolic origin of churches. This man authored Against the Scorpions, an attack on Gnosticism, and his other writings include the Prescription against Heretics. This thinker openly espoused Traducianism, or the belief that new souls are created naturally by the reproductive process, not directly by God. This man preceeded St. Cyprian as the most notable theologian from Carthage. He coined the terms \"New Testament\", \"Old Testament\", and \"trinity\", but he eventually left the church to became a Montanist. For 10 points, name this early Christian theologian, the first to write in Latin.", "Tertullian", "H"]
["This text advocates knowledge of how vedana proceeds from two groups of six senses, and it follows a discourse about separating the body and mind from the true conjecture of the self delivered to a group of five followers that included Kaundinya. This entry in the Vinaya discusses passion and delusion and it was originally delivered to a group of agnihotra monks that practiced religious rites worshipping the title entity. The third entry in a series of discourses which began with a discussion of the Middle Way and the Four Noble Truths, this text submits that recognition and intellectual detachment can disentangle one from the suffering caused by sense and feeling, which are personified by the titular elemental force. For 10 points, identify this portion of the Tripitaka that titles one of the sections of The Waste Land and extols its addressees to recognize that \"all is burning.\"", "Fire Sermon", "H"]
["One figure in these texts is has aspects of Armaiti, Asha, and Khshathra, as well as three others termed the \"Bountiful Immortals.\"", "Gathas", "H"]
["In Chinese myth, Lan Caihe, one of the eight immortals, is traditionally said to possess only one of these objects.", "Shoe", "H"]
["Members of this culture practice a traditional textile art called paj ntaub", "The", "H"]
["Jean Sauvaget has attempted to trace the origin of it, using as evidence early Egyptian sources calling them \"mujawwaf.\" Archeologists' have found the earliest representation of it on an Umayyad coin found in Syria, while Creswell controversially places the earliest one at a site at Khassaki built by Al Mansur. The first one was built by al-Walid, while the Fath-al-Bari describes its original meaning as \"a place of kings.\" The one in the Mezquita of Cordoba is non-standard-Abd ar-Rahman was said to have built it imagining himself still in Damascus. Originally described as a special room in the Quran, it marks the location of the Qibla. For 10 points, identify this portion of a mosque, literally meaning \"niche,\" that indicates the direction of Mecca and thus which way prayers should face.", "Mihrab", "H"]
["According to an old German tradition, single women who want to marry should sleep naked on the eve of this man's feast day. This man's remains were brought to the cathedral of Amalfi by Peter of Capua after Constantinople was taken by the French. In The Golden Legend, Voragine tells of this man's meeting with an old lecher and his subsequent fast for the Lord to forgive Nicholas' sins. According to some accounts, he was said to have traveled to the land of the anthropophagi, though Origen describes Scythia as his mission field. In the Bible it was this man who asked how five loaves of bread and two fish would feed so many. This disciple of John the Baptist was martyred at Patras on an X shaped cross. For 10 points, identify this apostle, the first disciple of Christ and the patron saint of Scotland.", "Andrew the Apostle", "H"]
["A \"spurious\" one of these features an \"apostrophe to Satan\" after a chapter on the \"malignity and folly\" of that evil figure, and was written by Ignatius of Antioch. Its final chapter features a specific exhortation to two women, Evodia and Syntyche, who are asked to \"be of the same mind,\" while its third chapter includes a warning to \"Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.\" The author of this text also warns its recipients about Judaizing teachers, and mentions Epaphroditus, who brought this text to its title group. Coming between writings addressed to the Ephesians and Colossians, for 10 points, name this Pauline epistle written to the members of a Macedonian church.", "Epistle to the Philippians", "H"]
["According to scripture, one becomes one of these individuals when they are \"released through right gnosis,\" and the best known of them says he \"beat the drum of the deathless.\" One of these figures was entrusted with red and white bibs and caps in his role as overseer of babies' health, and another answered queries posed by Menander I. Two of these figures named Pindola and one named N?gasena are included in a group of sixteen or eighteen of these individuals, one of whom tries to flatter his father by complimenting his shadow after asking that father for his inheritance. Spiritual inheritance was given to Rahula, who thus realized nibbana and abandoned the fetters of materialism, just like his tathagata father, Buddha. For 10 points, name these enlightened beings who mastered spiritualism and serenity in Buddhism.", "Arhat", "M"]
["This book was edited by Marcion of Sinope to create a dualistic religion. A woman who was bent over for eighteen years is healed in this book's thirteenth chapter. Like a later book, this one is addressed to Theophilus, which lends credence to the idea that its author also penned Acts of the Apostles. This Synoptic Gospel is the only one to feature the parables of the Corrupt Steward and the Good Samaritan. Its first chapter describes the ministry of John the Baptist. For 10 points, name this longest Synoptic Gospel, the third overall, which comes between Mark and John.", "Gospel of Luke", "M"]
["This man was preceded in his chief office by Palladius. This author of a Letter to the Soldiers of Coroticus wrote the Confessio, which recalls a dream in which Victoricus gives him the letter that spurred his mission. Legend holds that it took so long for this man's teachings of the Gospel to take hold that his ash walking stick took root in the ground while he was preaching and became a tree. He legendarily drove all the snakes from his adopted homeland and used the three-leaved shamrock to explain the Holy Trinity. For 10 points, name this patron saint of Ireland.", "Saint Patrick", "M"]
["This faith uses the Ik Onkar symbol to represent the \"one god.\" This religion's marriage ceremony is called the Anand Karaj. Its three pillars are Kirat, Karni, and Vand Chakko. Its followers have faith in a supreme being called Waheguru. Early leaders of this religion include Ram Das and Arjan Dev. Uncut hair and wooden combs are two of the \"five Ks\" of this religion, whose sacred texts include the Bani, Chupai, and the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this religion, which believes that Nanak was the first of ten gurus.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["In the Gospel of Luke, Jesus claims that this prophet's sign will be the only sign of the current wicked generation. God sends this prophet from Gathhepher a tree for shade. That tree withers away when God causes the sun to beat down on this man, after which he asks God to take his life. This prophet's namesake book opens with the story of his attempted flight by boat from the Lord to Tarshish after ignoring orders to preach in Nineveh. For 10 points, name this Old Testament prophet who spent three days and three nights inside the stomach of a large fish.", "Jonah", "M"]
["One rite in this faith consists of removing the kushti girdle string while washing one's hands. Modern-day adherents of this faith initiate seven-year-olds in the Navjote ceremony, during which the children receive white wool shirts. Indians known as Parsees practice this religion, whose funeral rites dictate building towers of silence to house corpses. The Devas and Amesha Spentas are evil and good spirits in this religion, which centers on a conflict between Angra Mainyu and Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this dualistic Iranian religion whose holy text is the Avesta.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["One of these texts describes a discourse between Subhuti and another figure, and opens with several monks begging for breakfast. Another of these texts claims that it is okay to bribe children with toys in order to save them from a burning house, illustrating the concept of upaya. The Nichiren sect is based on one of these documents, which includes a discourse on how to achieve enlightenment. For 10 points, name this word that literally means \"thread,\" and which identifies texts named Diamond, Lotus, and Kama.", "Sutra", "M"]
["This figure's birth and life are celebrated in a spring holiday called Vesakha. A hermit named Asita prophesied that this figure would be great. This figure undertook the \"Great Departure\" with his charioteer Channa. The idea that dukkha can be avoided by detachment from the senses is found in this man's Fire Sermon. He changed his name after attaining enlightenment while sitting under the Bodhi tree. For 10 points, name this man, born Siddhartha Gautama, whose \"four noble truths\" and \"eightfold path\" are key steps towards nirvana in his namesake religion.", "Buddhahood", "H"]
["In some traditions, women sing the prayer \"Gott Fun Avrohom\" at this event's end. A special case of this day before Pesakh is the ha-Gadol one, while other special ones include Shekalim and Zakhor. One of its major observances can be modified by the triennial cycle. The muktzah are thirty-nine actions forbidden on this day, and it is introduced with the Kabbalat nusach. Its end is marked by a ritual involving ha-aysh and b'samim, the Havdalah service. A haftarah is read on this day to accompany a weekly Torah portion, which begins every Friday at sundown. For 10 points, name this Jewish day of rest.", "Psalm 92", "H"]
["One text composed by a member of this group describes the invasion of Babar into India through the metaphor of a marriage; that is the Baburbani. That member of this group emphasized three principles, including Vand Chakko, the principle of giving to the poor. He later educated a member of this group who drastically expanded the religion with which they were associated by establishing new temples; that man was Angad. More famous principles expounded by these people include repetitive chanting of the name of the divine, known as Naam Japna, while the last member of this group was elevated by Gobind Singh and is composed of hymns and meditations on God's name. For 10 points, name this group comprised of ten people, including Granth Sahib and the first one, Nanak.", "Sikh gurus", "H"]
["The first fragment of an apocryphal text attributed to this writer describes two men in a garden, one lame and one blind. Commentators have noted the significance of the number twenty-five in this figure's vision of a temple. The third chapter of this man's book describes how he found himself called \"to be a watchman for the people of Israel.\" This figure has a vision in which he sees the chariot of God pulled by creatures with four wings and the four faces of a man, lion, ox, and eagle. In one Islamic story about this figure, this man resurrected either four or nine thousand people by reassembling their skeletons with a whirlwind; that story, in Christianity, occurs in the valley of the dry bones. For 10 points, name this third major prophet, whose book comes before Daniel and after Lamentations.", "Ezekiel", "H"]
["The period leading to", "Tisha B'Av", "H"]
["At one point in this work, the writer laments that he keeps on doing the evil he does not want to do. In the fourteenth chapter of this work, he urges believers to accept those whose faith is weak and can only eat vegetables. This work confidently proclaims that \"in all things God works for the good of those who love him\" and that \"our present sufferings are not worth comparing\" with future glory. This book judges that all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God and that the wages of sin is death. It also poses the theological argument that man received death through Adam's sin but life through the one act of righteousness performed by Jesus. For 10 points, name this epistle written by Paul which appears after Acts and is addressed to the residents of a major city in Italy.", "Demography of the Roman Empire", "H"]
["In this book, after the tenure of Othniel, Ehud stabbed the Moabite king Eglon, resulting in defecation. Also mentioned in this book is Jephthah, who swore an oath in return for victory against the Ammonites. As a result, his daughter was immolated. The book ends with an account of the idolatry of Micah, the Crime of Gibeah, and the War against Benjamin. A more famous section of this book details the selection of men for an army based on their method of drinking from a river. The last of the namesake figures of this book also lost a bet, but after falling asleep, lost his strength due to having his hair cut off by his lover Delilah. For 10 points, name this Biblical book partially concerning Samson that precedes Ruth and follows Joshua, named for its eponymous leaders of Israel.", "Book of Judges", "H"]
["Knives, platters, and basins are among the gold and silver articles that Mithredath the treasurer counts out to Sheshbazzar the prince of Judah at the beginning of this book. The main character of this book proclaims a fast at the river of Ahava in order to ensure protection from God for a return journey, since the group was ashamed to ask for that protection from King Artaxerxes who had sent them. Upon that group's return to Jerusalem, the title prophet chastises the people for intermarrying with pagans, and the people agree to divorce them voluntarily. Chronicling the rebuilding of the temple after the Babylonian captivity as well as the establishment of Torah law among the Jews, for 10 points, name this Old Testament book commonly paired with Nehemiah.", "Ezra", "H"]
["Some people observing this holiday choose to eat at least one dairy meal in observence of Chalav. This was the first occasion that individuals could bring Bikkurim, or first fruits, to the Temple in Jerusalem. This occasion begins on the sixth of Sivan with a reading of the Akdamut. The book of Ruth is customarily read during this holiday. One custom in the period preceding this holiday commemorates a plague during the lifetime of Rabbi Akiva. It is customary to stay up all night studying the Torah at its end, and this holiday itself ends the Counting of the Omer. Celebrating the same event as Pentecost, this is, for 10 points, name this member of the shalosh regalim, a Jewish Festival of Weeks commemorating Moses's receipt of the Ten Commandments.", "Shavuot", "H"]
["In the beginning of this book, three Jewish servants refuse to eat the food of the king, but nonetheless grow healthier on a diet of vegetables and water. In one part of this book sometimes omitted, two men disagree about the type of tree under which they claim a woman met her lover, leading to their deaths. In a different part of this book which is sometimes omitted, a giant creature is secretly fed through a trapdoor, which is revealed by the namesake of this book. In this book, Shadrach, Mashach, and Abed-Nego are thrown in a furnace. Later, the writing \"Mene, Mene, Tekel, Ufarsin\" appears on the wall at Belshazzar's Feast. The apocryphal sections of \"Susanna and the Elders\" and \"Bel and the Dragon\" sometimes appears in this book of the Bible. For 10 points, name this book named for a prophet whom King Darius throws into a den of lions.", "Daniel", "H"]
["In one story from this religion, the beautiful Sulasa throws her evil husband Sattuka off a cliff. That story is one of this religion's five hundred fifty Jataka tales. According to this religion, which includes nuns known as", "Theravada", "H"]
["Paul Draper has formulated a Bayesian version of this problem by relying on a postulate called the \"indifference hypothesis\". This problem titles a book by Peter van Inwagen, who has argued against it. William Rowe attempted to supply the inductive basis for this argument in an article about \"Ruminations on\" a certain property, and that article was subsequently criticized by Alvin Plantinga from the standpoint of \"degenerate evidence\". Hume formulated a version of this problem in the Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion by arguing that one could not show from a world with both good and bad in it that it has a perfectly good cause. Leibniz's attempt to resolve this problem led him to argue that this is the best of all possible worlds in his Theodicy. For 10 points, identify this problem which asks how an omnipotent, benevolent deity could exist given that bad things happen.", "Problem of evil", "M"]
["During a diatribe in chapter six of this text, the author criticizes the statement that \"food is meant for the stomach and the stomach for food,\" countering with the argument that \"the body is meant...for the Lord.\" The author of this text commands \"drive out the wicked person among you\" in response to a man involved in a relationship with his father's wife. A controversial passage from this text commands that \"women should remain silent in the churches.\" Its author repeatedly warns against idolatry in his congregation in this text. It appears before other works in the same style like Galatians and Ephesians. Its passage claiming love transcends faith and hope is often read at weddings. For 10 points, name this New Testament book, the earlier of two letters sent from Paul to some Christians in Greece.", "Ferdinand Kittel", "M"]
["This belief was officially installed in one land with the Synod of Beth Lapat, presided over by Barsauma and other members of the school of Nisibis. This belief was attacked by Philip Sidetes and by Proclus, and The Bazaar of Heraclides is an apology for it. The actual nature of its main doctrine is indeterminate because of the use of the word prosopon, and this heresy was attacked in twelve anathemas. Theodore of Mopsuestia was a precursor of this heresy, and it involved the rejection of the title Theotokos, leading to it being denounced by Cyril of Alexandria at the Council of Ephesus. This heresy was prominent in Antioch and the east, and it held that Christ had two distinct natures. For 10 points, identify this heresy named for a Patriarch of Constantinople.", "glyph1197estorianism ", "M"]
["A lesser-known version of this type of observance is called Hemdat ha-Yamim, and takes place on the holiday of Tu Bishvat. Songs commonly sung during this observance include \"Had Gadya\" and \"Daiyenu.\" Steps of its most well- known version include urchatz, the ritual washing of the hands, and maror. Like Yom Kippur, this ritual is concluded with the words \"Next year in Jerusalem,\" after the afikoman is found. This ritual features the discussion of the Four Sons, the recitation of the Four Questions, and the drinking of four cups of wine, which are symbolic of the four distinct redemptions promised by God to the Hebrews in the book of Exodus. For 10 points, the consumption of matzah highlights this ritual Jewish meal, conducted on the first and second days of Passover.", "Passover Seder", "M"]
["One person in this book was the subject of an assassination attempt by Bigthana and Teresh. In this book, the chamberlain Hegai serves as the keeper of the women, and Hatach serves the title character. The antagonist of this work is a member of the Agag family who is married to Zeresh and who orders the creation of a fifty foot high gallows. The only book of the Hebrew Bible not found among the Dead Sea Scrolls in at least one fragment, it begins with Vashti being deposed for disobeying Ahasuerus. It explains the origins of a holiday named for the device used to determine the best day for the slaughter of Jews. The title figure of this book was an orphan cared for by Mordecai, whose refusal to bow greatly upsets Haman. For 10 points, name this book that is read on Purim.", "Book of Esther", "M"]
["One section of this work details the combat between the army of High Priest Lib and his brother Shiz against King Coriantumr. The namesake of another of its sections took away Korihor's power of speech after outpreaching the lawyer Zeezrom. This work is said to have first been interpreted with a pair of seer stones called Urim and Thummim. One part of this text details the Jaredite civilization's existence in America. Much of it focuses on the war between the Nephites and the Lamanites. Its sections include the Book of Alma, the Book of Lehi, and the Book of Ether. It was supposedly originally written on \"reformed Egyptian\" on a set of golden plates. For 10 points, name this work revealed by the angel Moroni to Joseph Smith, a sacred text of the Church of Latter Day Saints.", "Book of Mormon", "M"]
["An Ethiopian text called the Rest of the Words of Baruch combines this text with one similar to Fourth Baruch. This work's first chapter alludes to a woman's lovers, among all of which there are none to comfort her, which may refer to Egypt and Assyria. A later verse of this book accuses \"The Lord is like an enemy: he has swallowed up Israel.\" This work consists of five poems, each with a multiple of twenty-two lines, and the first four of which are acrostics. A reading of this work is followed by a reading of the Kinnot on Tisha B'Av. This work was written following the capture of Jehoiachin at Nebuchadnezzar's sacking of Jerusalem and the destruction of the First Temple. It is attributed to the prophet Jeremiah. For 10 points, name this Old Testament book that relates the sorrows of Israel.", "Book of Lamentations", "M"]
["This man angered Muslims by sleeping with his feet towards the Kaaba while in Mecca, after which he claimed that there was no way to sleep without pointing one's feet at God's house, since it is everywhere. Bhai Bala composed the most influential of the biographies of this man's life, which are called Janamsakhis. He disappeared while bathing in the Kali Bein. This man's followers argued over whether to cremate his body or bury it; the pro- cremation crowd cremated the flowers they had left for him, while the pro-buriers buried their flowers. His religious project was summed up by the quote \"There is no Hindu, there is no Muslim,\" which led him to found a religious office currently occupied by a book, the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this first guru and founder of Sikhism.", "Guru glyph1197anak Dev Ji", "M"]
["One of these figures revealed such texts as \"Ornament for Clear Realization\" and \"Distinguishing the Middle and the Extremes,\" two of his namesake Five Treatises. In one tradition, these figures must vow to uproot \"endless blind passions.\" One of these figures holds a thunderbolt scepter and is the patron figure of the Shaolin school. These figures must practice the six perfections and travel through five margas, which correspond to the ten bhumi. One of them, Maitreya, will arrive in the future. Another of them, the dedicatee of the Heart Sutra, represents \"infinite compassion.\" For 10 points, name these Mahayana Buddhist figures exemplified by Avalokitesvara, who have achieved some degree of enlightenment but put off nirvana in order to help others.", "Bodhisattva", "M"]
["According to Pausanias, one of this man's grandsons spends eternity weaving a rope that is constantly eaten by a donkey. That grandson of this man, Ocnus, also founded Mantua, which he named after his mother, this man's daughter, Manto. This son of Everes and Chariclo died after being struck by Apollo's arrow while drinking at the spring Telphussa. One story claims that he was given the ability to understand birdsong in reparation for a curse he'd received after stumbling upon Athena bathing. He received another punishment after hitting a mating pair of snakes with his staff, after which he was settled a bet between Zeus and Hera by stating that women enjoy sex more than men. For 10 points, name this figure who spent seven years as a woman, a blind prophet of Thebes.", "Tiresias", "M"]
["A seven-station backtrack to Mosera followed the death of this figure at Mount Hor. This man's grandson impaled Cozbi and Zimri with a spear out of holy zeal against the Heresy of Peor. One son of this grandfather of Phinehas tended to the censers of several dead priests after the earth swallowed up several insurgents against this figure's rule. This father of Ithamar and Eleazar owned an object that produced ripe almonds during the rebellion of his cousin Korah. This figure caused his sister to be afflicted by tzaarath after he lost most of his power following his building of the Golden Calf. For 10 points, name this first High Priest of the Israelitse, a Levite who owned a sapphire rod and was the brother of Miriam and Moses.", "Aaronic priesthood (Latter Day Saints)", "M"]
["The narrator of this book hears the \"voice of the Lord\" saying \"Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?\" and replies \"Here am I; send me.\" The title figure of this book also appears in Second Kings, in which he rebukes Hezekiah for giving too much information to the Babylonian King. The story of Hezekiah is also recounted in this book's thirty-sixth chapter. The forty-second through fifty-first chapters of this book consist of four \"Songs of the Suffering Servant.\" The last twenty six chapters of this book are usually known as the \"Book of Comfort,\" and see the title prophet expound on his prediction that \"a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.\" For 10 points, name this book of the Old Testament which precedes Jeremiah.", "Book of Isaiah", "M"]
["During one episode in The Seven Valleys, one of these figures is said to be represented by a watchman that chases a man until the man encounters his long-lost love. That example of these figures is also responsible for destroying the hosts of Sennacherib. The first Book of Enoch claims that one of these figures bound Azazel under the desert Dudael; that one guides Tobias to Media and frees Sarah from Asmodeus in the Book of Tobit. The only figure specifically named as holding this position serves as the commander of the armies of God, while the most famous one in Islam revealed the Qur'an to Muhammad. For 10 points, identify these messengers of God that include Uriel, Raphael, Gabriel, and Michael.", "Archangel", "H"]
["This figure is said to have natural mascara ringing his eyes, and he participates in the Yawm al-Qiyamah after ruling for forty years. He is the opposite of the Masih al-Dijjal, and one figure held to be synonymous with him carries the Blade of Evil's Bane, or the Zulfiqar. Some practitioners believe that this figure will be preceded by the appearance in Damascus of a tyrant who delights in ripping out the stomachs of women, the Sufyani, and other portents of this figure's arrival include red and white death and the appearance of a comet in the east.", "The Mahdi", "H"]
["During one festival, these peoples would barefootedly throw beans over their shoulders in order to exorcise spirits. Another ritual that these people partook saw two priests take strips of goat meat and touch the bodies of anyone they encountered. The death rituals performed by these peoples included the cutting off of a finger, if the body were to be cremated, and the burial of that finger so that the dead did not become a mischievous spirits. Such spirits were expelled yearly at one of their festivals, and the Arval priests were members of these peoples. The casting of mannequins made of rushes into a river was the culmination of this people's feast of the Argei. The work Attic Nights describes much of their religion, and every year, they would sacrifice a pig, ram and bull to appease their god of war, while during one of their most festive occasions, each family chose a \"Misrule Lord\" to lead their activities, as slaves were manumitted during it. The worshippers of deities called lares and pinates, for ten points, name people that celebrated the Lemuralia, Lupercalia, and the Saturnalia.", "Demography of the Roman Empire", "H"]
["This book is the prophetical text read on Yom Kippur during the afternoon services. This book's namesake covers himself in sackcloth and sits in ashes, and causes a commandment to be issued that \"neither man nor beast, her nor flock, taste any thing.\" The prayer that ultimately saves the namesake of this book claims that \"they that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy.\" That man, the son of Amittai, is last seen pledging to be angry until the day that he dies after God sends a worm that withers the gourd that man was sitting under for shade. This book sees that man flee by way of Joppa to Tarshish to escape God's instruction to preach against Ninevah, and is eventually thrown overboard, where his best-known fate befalls him. FTP, identify this book of the Hebrew bible where the namesake prophet is eaten, then barfed up, by a whale.", "Book of Jonah", "E"]
["One variety of this faith is outlined in the Pali (\"POLLY\") Canon. Another variety venerates those who become enlightened but remain in samsara (\"sam-SAHR-uh\"), called bodhisattvas (\"bo-dee-SOTT- vuhs\"). Those varieties are Theravada (\"THERE-uh-vah-duh\") and Mahayana (\"MAH-hi-yawn-uh\"). Adherents to another variety of this faith meditate on koans (\"KO-awns\") such as \"What is the sound of one hand clapping?\". For 10 points, name this Asian faith that venerates Siddhartha Gautama (sid-DAR- thuh go-TOM-uh\").", "Buddhism", "E"]
["During his execution, this figure was pierced by the Lance of Longinus. In addition to yelling at a fig tree for not bearing fruit, this figure healed a pig-eating man from Gerasa possessed by a horde of devils named Legion. This man was put to death by Pontius Pilate, and drops of his blood fell into the Holy Grail. For 10 points, name this Messiah and only son of God according to Christianity.", "Jesus", "E"]
["This man was born in the Year of the Elephant and won the battle of Badr (\"BAH-dur\"). He also signed the Treaty of Hudaybiya (\"WHO-day-BEE-yah\") with the Qurayshi (\"koo-RAY-shee\"). The sayings of this husband of Khadija (\"kah-DEE-zhah\") are collected in the Hadith (\"hah-DEETH\"). In a cave on Mount Hira, he was ordered by the angel Gabriel to read a scroll. This father of Ali destroyed the idols around the Ka'aba (\"KAA-bah\") after conquering Mecca in 630. For 10 points, name this greatest prophet of Islam.", "Muhammad", "E"]
["This figure protected the seven daughters of Jethro, one of whom, Zipporah, became this figure's wife. This son of Yocheved (\"YO-keh-ved\") once killed an Egyptian overseer who was beating a slave, after which this brother of Miriam fled to Midian until God appeared to him in the form of a burning bush. For 10 points, name this leader of the Israelites who begged Pharaoh to \"let my people go.\"", "Moses", "E"]
["According to the Koran, all angels, except Satan, prostrated themselves before this figure due to his knowledge. He was cursed to \"eat bread until he returned to the ground.\" In the New Testament, he is seen as the source of death for all men. His transgression is revealed to God when he is seen wearing a fig leaf. His rib was used to make his wife, Eve. For 10 points, name this Biblical figure, the first man.", "Adam", "E"]
["This figure's father was struck dumb for his disbelief after being told that his wife Elizabeth would conceive this figure. He taught that \"he who hath two coats\" should \"give to him who hath none.\" Salome (\"SAL-oh-may\") asked Herod for this figure's head on a platter. He gained his epithet for an action which he performed with water, but another would perform with the Holy Spirit. For 10 points, name this saint who baptized Jesus.", "John the Baptist", "E"]
["One figure involved in this event is drunk with the blood of saints. During it, seven vials are poured by seven angels in order to wreak havoc. It is set to take place on the Hill of Megiddo. Death, Famine, War, and Pestilence are the \"Four Horsemen\" of this event. For 10 points, identify this Biblical event where the forces of good and evil will do battle one last time.", "Apocalypse", "E"]
["This native of Tarsus undertook several missionary trips to western areas like Asia Minor and Syria. This author of two epistles to the Corinthians (\"core-IN-thee-uns\") and one to the Romans advocated the persecution of Jews who accepted Jesus, until he had a life-altering vision on the road to Damascus. For 10 points, identify this Catholic saint born with the name Saul.", "Paul the Apostle", "E"]
["Before he was born, his parents learned that he was not to touch a dead body, and he was to abstain from strong drink. He was involved with a Timnite woman and a harlot before meeting the woman that would betray him. He died during the collapse of a temple to Dagon (\"DAY-gon\"), but by destroying it, he got his revenge on the Philistines. For 10 points, name this lover of Delilah who lost his power after his hair was cut.", "Samson", "E"]
["As punishment for not worshipping a golden statue, this man's friends were ordered thrown into a furnace, but they were not burned. While training to be a scribe, this man was given the Babylonian name Belteshazzar (\"BEL-tuh-SHAH-zar\"). He interpreted the writing on the wall during Belshazzar's (\"BEL- shuh-zar's\") Feast. For 10 points, identify this Hebrew prophet and namesake of an Old Testament book who survived being chucked into a lion's den.", "Daniel", "M"]
["One custom associated with this holiday involves swinging a chicken around one's head, followed by its slaughtering. On this holiday, one goat is dedicated to Hashem and another is sent to Azazel [uh-ZEY-zuhl]. Also on this holiday, the Book of Jonah is read during the afternoon services. The fifth service, which marks the end of this holiday, is Neilah [nuh-ee-LAH], and a prayer chanted on the Eve of this holiday declares the annulment of all unfulfilled vows made to God, and is known as the Kol Nidre. Occuring five days before Sukkot, it is marked by about 25 hours of fasting. Observed on the tenth of Tishri, for 10 points what is this Jewish \"Day of Atonement\"?", "Yom Kippur", "M"]
["The Record of a Pilgrimage to China in Search of the Law was a work written by a practitioner of one sub-sect of this religion named Jikaku Daishi. Also known as Ennin, he was priest of the Tendai School of this religion, which holds that the phenomenal world is a manifestation of the Tathagata. Other Japanese sects of this religion include Kegon and Shingon. This religion describes the Three Marks of Existence as impermanence, suffering and no self, and the central texts of this religion are known as the Pali Canon. For 10 points, name this religion practiced in countries like India, China and Japan, whose major divisions include Theravada and Mahayana forms.", "Buddhism", "M"]
["\"The Manual of the Mother Church\" provides the rules and rituals for this religious faith. Its founder had undergone \"mesmeric and magnetic healing\" provided by a man named Phineas Quimby, some of whose ideas underpin this faith. That physical sickness comes from fear, sin, or false belief is dogma in this faith, which was founded in 1866. Using the text Science and Health with a Key to the Scriptures as a model for behavior is, FTP, what church founded by Mary Baker Eddy?", "Stephen Gottschalk", "M"]
["Members of this religion untie and tie the kushti, and souls pass over the Chinvato Peretav. The creed of this religion is the Fravarane, and its founder supported the followers of asha. It served as the state religion of the Sassanids, and dead bodies were once placed in Towers of Silence. The scriptures of this religion include the Gathas, and are known as the Avesta. The supreme god of this religion is attended by the Amesha Spentas, and opposed by Ahriman. For 10 points, identify this religion named for a Persian prophet, whose members worship Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["In this faith, those who follow only their own desires can be referred to as \"manmukh,\" as they are under the power of \"haumain,\" or self-centeredness, whereas those who want to follow the truth of God are referred to as \"gurmukh.\" Those who have undergone the amrit sanchar, or baptismal ceremony, can be considered \"pure,\" or \"Khalsa,\" in this faith. The Khalsa should be distinguished by their \"kesh,\" or uncut hair, and \"kirpan,\" or dagger, along with three other 'k'-characteristics. FTP this describes what syncretistic religion based on the Adi Granth and founded by Guru Nanak?", "Sikhism", "M"]
["Along with the Gospel of Matthew, this writer's namesake work is believed to have drawn from the hypothetical Q document. That work by this author tells the story of Elizabeth and Zachariah, the latter of whom was struck dumb until he agreed to name his son John, who later became John the Baptist. This author also traced Jesus's life back to Adam in that work, the longest of its kind as well as the only one to have a formal introduction. This author is also believed to have written Acts of the Apostles. For 10 points, name this doctor who wrote in Greek the third book of the New Testament, his namesake Gospel.", "Luke the Evangelist", "M"]
["This man defended Calvinist doctrine in Freedom of the Will, and another of his works is \"The End of the Wicked Contemplated by the Righteous.\" He married Sarah Pierrepont, and his grandfather, Solomon Stoddard, advocated the Half-Way Covenant. One work by this man begins with the quote \"Their foot shall slide in due time,\" and states \"The God who holds you over the pit of hell, much as one holds a spider, abhors you.\" For 10 points, name this clergyman who began the Great Awakening and delivered the sermon \"Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God.\"", "Jonathan Edwards", "M"]
["John Wilbur is the namesake of this religious sect's conservative division and feuded with Joseph John Gurney. A schism at this sect's Yearly Meeting in 1827 was caused by Elias Hicks, and its founder was \"Digged Out of His Burrowes\" in a Roger Williams work. This sect believes there is a divine presence in the soul that acts as a guiding force called the Inner Light, and members of it silently meditate and are opposed to oath-taking. For 10 points, name this religious sect founded by George Fox, and named for the command to \"tremble at the word of the Lord.\"", "Quakers", "E"]
["During it, Ezekiel's vision of the valley of dry bones is read, and some participants in this festival may take part in the \"counting of the Omer,\" which continues after the conclusion of this festival. During one event at this festival, \"Dayenu\" is sung, the \"afikomen\" is hidden, and participating children are asked the \"four questions.\"", "Passover", "E"]
["Members of this religion must recite a short obligatory prayer and a long obligatory prayer once a day, and a medium-length obligatory prayer three times a day. The founder of this religion wrote The Epistle to the Son of the Wolf. Adam, Krishna, and Muhammad are three of the ten Great Manifestations of God in this religion. In this religion, the title of Guardian of the Cause of God was held by Shoghi Effendi. A proponent of an early form of this religion adopted a title meaning \"gate\", the Bab. This religion's doctrine was laid out in the Book of Certitude. This religion is governed from the Universal House of Justice in Haifa, and it is represented by a nine-pointed star. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Baha'u'llah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "E"]
["One story about this holiday states that a certain religious leader created a cloak with 52 tassels in order to save a group of kings from a prison. In some regions, paper effigies filled with grass are burned at four in the morning, and on the last day of this holiday sisters traditionally bless and give gifts to their brothers. Multicolored kandeels are commonly employed in this holiday, one of whose days celebrates the death of the demon Narakasura. Jains celebrate this holiday as the day Mahavira attained enlightenment, but most famously it celebrates the return of Rama to his kingdom. For 10 points, name this Hindu festival of lights.", "Diwali", "E"]
["Tertullian claims that this man was brought before Emperor Domitian and thrown into a vat of boiling oil from which he escaped unharmed, leading to a feast of him \"before the Latin Gate.\" Like his elder brother, this man was a fisherman from the Lake of Genesareth, and he is symbolized in art by an eagle. One book named for him describes the struggle between the Lamb and the False Prophet, and was written on the island of Patmos. For 10 points, name this New Testament figure who stood with Mary at the Crucifixion and wrote Revelation as well as the last of the four canonical gospels, not to be confused with a similarly-named Baptist.", "John the Evangelist", "E"]
["One leader of this faith was so kind-hearted he dug six Persian wells for some peasants to irrigate their fields. Its founder, born in the 15th century, heavily emphasized the concept of Nam Japo and Kirat Karo, the former of which is the chanting of waheguru. Its main religious text was written in the Gumurkhi script and was appointed to be its eleventh leader. Adherents of this religion are bound to wear the five Ks, including Kes, or uncut hair, Kaccha, or undergarment, and Kirpan, or dagger. All female adherents to it carry the name Kaur, and it is split into two main groups, the Digimbara and the Svetembara. For 10 points, identify this religion of India whose leaders were gurus.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["A bust of Skagerrak hero John Gellicoe can be found here as well as seven sculptures of Francis Bird.", "St Paul's Cathedral, Dundee", "E"]
["One chapter of this text notes that King Benjamin had \"somewhat of contentions among his own people.\"", "Book of Mormon", "E"]
["One member of this group was allegedly reburied in Pisa Cathedral in the 400's. That member of this group produced a cryptic set of lines about a fish from the Mediterranean and a fish from Jordan. A Gospel produced by one member of this group describes the Harrowing of Hell and he paid for Christ's burial. In addition to Nicodemus, Paul of Tarsus was said to be one before he learned about the \"seed of Abraham.\" They included among their ranks the poorer people as opposed to the priestly class. Unlike their counterparts that rejected oral law, they believed that God gave Moses the knowledge of the Law. For 10 points, identify these peoples who were opposed to the Sadduccees.", "Pharisees", "M"]
["This work tells of the story of Korihor, a man stricken dumb because of being an Anti-Christ and dissuading people from the Gospel. It contains a section called the Words of the son of the title figure. When asked about the original language of the source, the translator said it was Reformed Egyptian. This, discovered by a 14-year old farm boy in Palmyra, New York, was found on the Hill Cumorah. Discovered and translated by Joseph Smith, for 10 points, name this sacred work of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.", "Book of Mormon", "M"]
["A Pharisee, this man studied to become a rabbi at Jerusalem and later took part in persecutions that saw Stephen the Martyr give a speech before him before getting stoned. He had a notable conversion, which happened when he was temporarily blinded while on the road to Damascus, and which is recorded in the book of Acts. He is also known for his many missionary travels throughout the known world. For 10 points, name this man, a disciple of Jesus Christ who wrote many Epistles.", "Paul the Apostle", "M"]
["The Mool Mantar is a hymn that praises the God of this religion. Included in its religious texts are the Varan Bhai Gurdas. This religion can be represented by the Khanda, and temples in this religion are known as Gurdwaras. Followers are asked to wear the Five K's, and one leader for this religion was Gobind Singh. This religion was founded by Guru Nanak in Punjab, and its most important scripture is the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this monotheistic religion founded in India.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["The Battle of Avarayr was fought after an attempt to impose this religion in Armenia. This religion's adherents cross a bridge known as the Chinvato Peretav after death. The Faravahar, the depiction of a Fravashi, is one of the primary symbols of this religion. Some sects of this religion on the Indian subcontinent place their dead on \"Towers of Silence.\" The main text of this faith contains sections known as the Yasna, Visparad, and Vendidad. The conflict between Ahriman and Ahura Mazda is central to, for 10 points, what religion whose holy book is the Avesta?", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["According to the Pali Canon, it can be achieved via vipassana alone or the four foundations of mindfulness. In Jainism, it results from an Arhat extinguishing all remaining aghatiya karmas. In Hinduism, it is attained along with Moksha, during which one achieves union with Brahman. It is seen as antithesis to samsara, and is the state of being free from dukka, or suffering. Seen as the end of the cycle of reincarnation once enlightenment is reached, for 10 points, identify this Buddhist equivalent of heaven.", "Nirvana", "M"]
["In the Hindu faith this practice is followed by Griha Pravesh, which involves kicking over a container filled with both rice and coins. Sikhs circle around the Guru Granth Sahib four times prior to performing this practice, which in Islam is ended by the talaq and started by signing a nikah. In Judaism this practice is performed under a chuppah and ended by smashing a glass, while in Catholicism it is the sacrament celebrated in a nuptial mass. For 10 points, identify this practice that often involves a dowry and the mutual exchange of rings.", "Marriage", "E"]
["This faith's symbols include the stylized words \"Ek Onkar\" and an emblem of three blades surrounding a circle. Sugar water is stirred in its amrit baptism ceremony, through which believers join the Khalsa order. Known for its Golden Temple in Amritsar, its holiest book is the Adi Granth, and its \"five Ks\" include long hair and ceremonial daggers. For 10 points, name this monotheistic Indian religion founded by Guru Nanak, whose male adherents often wear turbans.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["Its observance includes special evening prayers known as Tarawih, and it includes the time in which the Laylat al-Qadr, or Night of Power, occurred. This holiday contains multiple suhoors and iftars, and its central custom is begun by the fajr prayer and dictated by sawm, one of the Five Pillars. Ended by the festival of Eid al-Fitr, its central practice lasts from sunrise to sunset each day. For 10 points, name this Muslim month during which believers fast.", "Ramadan", "E"]
["This figure healed a man named Aeneas in the town of Sharon, and while visiting the port of Joppa, he revived Tabitha. His vision of unclean animals helped convince him to take the Gospel to Gentiles. This fisherman's brother Andrew was also an apostle, and he was crucified upside down. This man, called the \"rock\" upon whom the church would be built, later denied knowing Jesus three times. For 10 points, name this apostle and first Pope, who holds the keys to heaven.", "Simon the Zealot", "E"]
["Branches of this religion, referred to as \"mansions\", include Bobo Shanti and Niyabinghi, and this non-Jewish religion forbids eating shellfish in the I-tal dietary code. \"Groundations\" are holy days in this religion which also involves \"reasoning\" ceremonies. Haile Selassie is an incarnation of Jah, or God, in this religion which believes Mount Zion to be in Ethiopia. For 10 points, name this Jamaican religion whose members smoke ritual \"ganja\" and wear their hair in dreadlocks.", "Rastafari", "E"]
["Jehovah's Witnesses say its seventh chapter proves only 144,000 people will reach heaven. Addressed to seven churches of Asia and written by John of Patmos, it involves a third of all vegetation getting destroyed by hail and fire, the opening of seven seals, a seven-headed, ten-horned Beast, and the Whore of Babylon. For 10 points, name this New Testament book which features the Four Horsemen, a prophecy of Jesus' second coming and the end of the world.", "Cornwood", "E"]
["Members of this faith form houses known as sosyete, and its holy men are sometimes called houngan. It believes in an ancestral homeland of Ginen, worships the supreme being Bondye, and originates in Yoruban myth. The Ogunye and Ezili are families of this religion's spirits, or loa, which include Papa Legba and Baron Samedi. For 10 points, name this syncretic religion practiced in Louisiana and Haiti, whose rarer practices might involve zombies or pin-filled dolls.", "Voodoo", "E"]
["Some modern observers of this holiday use an orange to represent excluded women and gays, and its traditional songs include \"One Little Goat.\" Preceded by the elimination of chametz from houses, its observance on the 15th of Nisan includes the spilling of ten drops of wine and Four Questions asked by the youngest person present. Initiated by the Seder, for 10 points, name this eight-day holiday in which Jews celebrate the exodus from Egypt by eating unleavened matzah.", "Passover", "E"]
["This sect claims to derive its origins from the Flower Sermon, and one text compiled by this sect is called The Gateless Gate. Bodhidharma is revered as its founder in China, and a school within this sect established by Dogen is the Soto school. Devoted to achieving flashes of satori, or individual enlightenment, and known for paradoxical statements called koans, for 10 points, name this meditation-focused sect of Mahayana Buddhism, which is popular in Japan.", "Zen", "M"]
["According to legend, this man's life was taken five years early to prevent him from seeing his evil grandson. On two occasions, this figure presents his wife as his sister, and when he died he was buried in a cave purchased from Ephron. This man built an altar at Sechem, where [*] land was promised to his descendants. He had a child with his servant Hagar, believing his wife too old to bear a son; he later went to Mount Moriah with a son, where a ram was taken in that son's place. For 10 points, name this father of Ishmael and Isaac, wife of Sarah, and founding patriarch of the Israelites.", "Abraham", "M"]
["Verse 21 of the 19th sura of the Koran is sometimes called a reference to it. Justin's 100th Dialogue with Trypho provides support for this doctrine, and Peter Comestor responded to St. Bernard's critique of it. Evidence in Scripture for this doctrine is found in Genesis 3:15 and Luke 1:28. A [*] \"feast\" of this doctrine was established by Sixtus IV and is held on December 8th, and Pope Pius IX established this doctrine as dogma. Often confused with the Annunciation, for 10 points, name this Catholic doctrine, which holds that Mary was purged of original sin before the conception and later virgin birth of Jesus.", "Immaculate Conception", "M"]
["Its followers set aside four or five Ayyam-i-Ha, or Intercalary Days, before observing a nineteen-day fast. One leaderr of this religion translated Epistle to the Son of the Wolf into English; that leader was Guardian Shoghi Effendi, and its Houses of Worship include the New Delhi [*] Lotus Temple. In favor of abolishing the extremes of wealth and poverty, its Book of Certitude emphasizes the unity between God, religions, and humanity. Currently centered at the Universal House of Justice in Haifa, for 10 points, name this religion, founded in 1844 by the Bab and popularized by Baha'ullah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["Chapters four and five of this book describe Barak's military success; in chapter seven of this book, the Israelite army is reduced to three hundred men who lap up water. Also featuring the word \"Shibboleth\", one character in this book brags about slaying a thousand men at Ramath-Lehi with a [*] donkey's jawbone; that character, a Nazirite with long hair, destroys a Philistine temple by pushing its two central pillars apart. For 10 points, name this book of the Bible that recounts the stories of Gideon, Deborah and Samson, named for the twelve arbiters of Israel before it became a kingdom.", "Book of Judges", "M"]
["In Islam a version of this symbol marks every fourth of a Hizb in the Quran. In Hinduism, one of these objects represents eight sources of wealth presided over by Lakshmi, and the al-Quds variety represents Jerusalem. The Tarot card named for this is the seventeenth Major Arcana, and one of [*] these with five different colors represents the Druze. Though not grains of sand, Abraham was promised his descendents would be as numerous as these. For 10 points name this symbol which led the magi to Bethlehem, which, when paired with a crescent, represents Islam, and whose six-pointed variety represents Judaism.", "Star", "M"]
["One holiday in this religion celebrates the Forty Immortals and is called Maghi; another celebrates five men who entered a tent with the intention of losing their heads; that holiday, Vaisakhi, marks the origin of this religion's baptism from an iron [*] bowl. Its sacred text is considered to be alive and was originally called the Adi Granth, and the \"Five Ks\" are to be followed by all believers include carrying a ceremonial dagger, or kirpan, and maintaining uncut hair. For 10 points, name this monotheistic religion whose Golden Temple can be found in Amritsar, India, expounded by Nanak and nine other Gurus.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["Morton Smith discovered a \"secret\" version of this document used by the Carpocrates. This book, the only New Testament book in which Jesus speaks Aramaic, contains a naked man running from Jesus' arrest, who, by tradition, is considered to be the author himself, and the parable of the [*] mustard seed. Usually considered the first to be written chronologically, many versions omit verse 16:9 through 20, ending with the empty tomb rather than the Resurrection of Jesus. For 10 points, name this New Testament Gospel situated between Matthew and Luke, the second.", "The Gospel According to Mark (short story)", "M"]
["Their festivals include binghi, or 'groundations', and the more common \"reasonings\", and their dietary code, I-tal, stems from a literal belief that one's body is a temple. One sacred text of this group is called the Holy Piby, and members of this faith use word formations like [*] \"downpression\" and \"overstanding\" , while rejecting \"isms\". They await the fall of \"Babylon\", or white oppression. For 10 points, name this faith whose exponents worship Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia as God, a Jamaican religion whose practices include the religious use of cannabis and the wearing of dreadlocks.", "Rastafari", "M"]
["In some denominations, \"epiclesis\" precedes this practice, and Justin Martyr's First Apology is sometimes used as evidence that early practicioners believed in \"real presence\". In the Eastern Orthodox church, this ritual is accompanied by the [*] anaphora prayer; Scriptural precedent for this ritual is found in Matthew 26:28 and Mark 14:24. At the Marburg Colloquy, Luther and Zwingli diverged in their doctrine regarding a component of this ritual known as transubstantiation. For 10 points, identify this rite, which involves the consumption of bread and wine as the body and blood of Jesus.", "Eucharist", "M"]
["Before this figure was born, his mother dreamt that a six-tusked white elephant was piercing her right side, and a meal served by the blacksmith Kunda once made this figure very ill. This figure's son was named Rahula, and his birthday is sometimes [*] celebrated by the holiday Vesak. One day, this figure was shocked to see an old man, a sick man, a corpse, and a monk, despite being raised to avoid all suffering as a prince; after this, under the bodhi tree, the Four Noble Truths came to him. For 10 points, name this first figure to achieve nirvana.", "Gautama Buddha", "M"]
["In some German traditions, this event is initiated with the Funken bonfire, and the Archdiocese of Milan excludes six Sundays from their measurement of it. Towards its end, it was customary to wrap statues in violet cloth. Representing time [*] spent in the desert, its last two weeks are known as Passiontide, and it begins on Ash Wednedsay. For 10 points, name this period during which many Christians give up something enjoyable, spanning about forty days until Easter.", "Lent", "M"]
["One story in this text revolves around the conspiracy of Bigtan and Teresh. Like Song of Solomon, it is a book of the Bible that never uses the word \"God\", and the antagonist determines the date of his plan's execution by rolling lots or dice. The title character replaces [*] Vashti, who failed to show at a feast, and goes to Shushan as queen to Ahasuerus. There, she fasts for three days and finds that a vizier to whom her cousin Mordechai refused to bow, Haman the Agagite, is plotting against her people. For 10 points, name this book, a Megillah read on Purim in which the title queen saves the Jews of Persia from execution.", "Book of Esther", "H"]
["This figure's wife was conceived when a deity changed into a red arrow and struck a maiden's genitals, and one man under the commander of this figure found a sword balancing on its hilt with its blade toward the sky in a storeroom after a thunder god visited him in a dream. After defeating one foe, this figure entertained his men by singing a song about how one should give his best beef to youngest wives and the leftovers to older wives. This figure found a winged man riding atop a turtle who became his guide, and this figure reached Kumano after receiving advice from a red three-legged bird. This wielder of the sword Futsu-no-mitama gained help from the bird Yatagarasu and fought against Nagasunekiho at Kusaka, which resulted in the death of this figure's brother Itsuse, who was buried at Mt. Kama. This figure set off on his quest at the age of forty-five, and this grandson of Hikohoho set out to establish imperial rule at Yamato. A descendent of the goddess Amaterasu, for 10 points, identify this legendary first emperor of Japan.", "Japanese cruiser Unebi", "H"]
["This text compares true religion to choice wine whose seal has been broken and invites the addressee to have a drink. This text states its purpose as \"vindicating equity and justice\", to which end it recounts a story about a revelation in a Tehran dungeon. This text eulogizes two martyrs whom it calls the Twin Shining Lights. This text was written to protest the murder of two of the author's followers in Isfahan and it summarizes the author's earlier work, which included the Four Hidden Valleys and the Book of Certitude. For ten points, name this Baha'i holy text and last written work of Bahaullah, a letter to a man whose father had a lupine nickname.", "Epistle to the Son of the Wolf", "H"]
["In the 20th century, this religion and its practices were reformed by a woman nicknamed \"Mama Olga\". The peji is an altar used in this religion, while the terreiro is this religion's house of worship. Sects of this religion include Ketu, which focuses on the worship of the goddess Oxum [osh-um] as well as Jeje. This religion's ceremonies include the worship of Baba Egum, or ancestor spirits. Practitioners of this religion call themselves \"povo de santo\", which means people of the Saint. Some followers of them may practice a form of dance-fighting known as capoeira, and most speak Portuguese. For ten points, name this African-based religion practiced in Brazil.", "Candombl\u00e9", "H"]
["At the 554 synod of Seleucia, Patriarch Joseph condemned the Nestorians for performing this ceremony on people who were not eligible for it. The biography of St. Hypatius is cited as proof that in the ancient Church, this ceremony could only be performed by a priest. James 5:14-15 is cited to defend the existence of this ceremony, which John Calvin condemned as \"histrionic hypocrisy\". This fifth of the seven sacraments is often followed by Viaticum, a special giving of the Eucharist whose Latin name translates as \"provisioning\", referring to the metaphysical journey that often follows this sacrament. For ten points, name this Catholic sacrament administered to the ill or dying.", "Anointing of the Sick (Catholic Church)", "H"]
["This book is the only source we have for a lost history text known as the Chihrdad. This book contains a dialogue with Bokht-Mara on the issue of ritual purity, and the fifth section of this book is written as a response to a curious man named Yaqub. This text is divided into sections called nasks, and its authorship is traditionally ascribed to somebody named Adurfarnbag. This book does not enjoy the status of scripture, and unlike earlier texts from its religion such as the Fravarane or the Vendidad, it was composed under Islamic rule. Summarizing the Avesta and describing ways to worship Ahura Mazda, for ten points name this official encyclopedia of the Zoroastrian religion.", "Denkard", "H"]
["Customs observed by this people include a \"sacred silence\" following a successful hunt and the avoiding of particular fruits during the rainy season, which can be explained by the vengeance of Puluga following the death of Tomo, the first man. These people hold that spirits haunt the thickets of the thorny Calamus leaf and are known to encyclopedic detail by the oko-paiad or oko-bumu. This people connects the singing cicada with the origin of night and day and is divided into autonomous \"local groups,\" including the Aka-Kol, which are present in both the \"Great\" division of their home, which includes the Jarawa, and the \"Little,\" which includes the staunchly isolationist Sentinelese. Considered alongside the Malayasian Semang and other negritos, for 10 points, name this group of islanders who were studied by Radcliffe-Brown.", "Andamanese people", "M"]
["This religion's founder caused controversy by lying with his feet pointed at a mihrab and rescued the minstrel Mardana, who was turned into a sheep in a land ruled by women. The appointment of masands was introduced by Ram Das to supervise sangats, and this religion's holiest site is the Golden Temple. The Khalsa order is identified with observance of the \"Five K's\", and after the death of Gobind Singh, this religion's scripture, the Adi Granth, assumed the position of Guru. For 10 points, name this Indian religion concentrated in Punjab and founded by Nanak.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["In this religion, time is conceived of in terms of utsarpini and avasarpini, ascending and descending arcs of a wheel with spokes called ara. Via a process called nirjara, adherents of this religion can destroy a substance which binds to the soul called karman, and debate over whether asceticism demands nudity distinguishes Digambaras and Svetambaras. Followers of this religion venerate the twenty-four Tirthankaras and follow a doctrine of nonviolence called ahimsa. For 10 points, name this Indian religion founded by Mahavira.", "Jainism", "M"]
["This text relates the story of a stone striking the iron and clay feet of a statue composed of various metals, and this text includes an analysis of Jeremiah's prediction of seventy years of desolation. Three men are preserved when throne into a furnace in this work which includes the vision of combat between a ram and goat. This text also relates the writing on the wall at Belshazzar's feast and the title character's survival after being thrown into the den of lions. For 10 points, name this book of the Bible whose title character interprets dreams for the kings of Babylon.", "Book of Daniel", "M"]
["The succession of this religion's authorities and obedience to those successors are treated in this religion's \"lesser covenant\" and \"greater covenant\", respectively. This religion's texts include the Tablets of the Divine Plan and The Hidden Words, and this religion has a calendar of nineteen months of nineteen days. Symbolized by a nine-pointed star and led by a series of Manifestations of God, this religion's central text is The Book of Certitude. For 10 points, name this religion centered in Haifa whose key figures include the B\u00e1b and Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["One of these texts was extended by works detailing the gavamayana and agnihotra, and one set of commentaries on these texts provides allegorical interpretations of rituals taught to pupils while isolated in the wilderness. One of these texts is divided into ten mandalas, and these texts were the first to be designated as shruti. These texts were supplemented by \"forest books\" called Aranyakas, which were written later than the Brahmanas. For 10 points, name these collections of sacred hymns grouped into Samhitas, a set of Hindu texts consisting of the Sama, the Yajur, the Atharva, and the Rig.", "Vedas", "M"]
["This sect's founder wrote the sermons The Circumcision of the Heart and The Almost Christian, and schisms in this sect were created by leaders including Jabez Bunting. This sect's founder emphasized the idea of \"perfect love\", and early missions promoting this sect were led by Thomas Coke. A dispute over the doctrine of double predestination caused a split between George Whitefield and this sect's founder, John Wesley. For 10 points, name this Christian sect named for its followers' rigorous manner of worship.", "Methodism", "M"]
["The process by which this text was written was analyzed by Theodor N\u00f6ldeke in his history of it, and unusual sequences of letters of the alphabet open some sections of this text including its second section, \"The Cow\", which also contains the \"Throne Verse\". Worshippers must perform ritual ablutions called wudu prior to handling this text, and verses called ayahs compose its one hundred fourteen chapters called suras. Revealed by the angel Gabriel to the prophet Mohammed, For 10 points, name this central text of Islam.", "Quran", "M"]
["Sub-branches of this religious sect include one founded by Vasubandhu and Asanga and another which focuses on Amitabha, the proprietor of Sukhavati. In this sect which emphasizes sunyata, or emptiness, the individual's final goal is beyond that of becoming an arhat. This sect which includes the Yogacara and Pure Land branches also emphasizes enlightened beings who willingly remain in samsara to aid others called bodhisattvas. For 10 points, name this \"Greater Vehicle\", the largest branch of Buddhism.", "Mahayana", "M"]
["This religious sect's founder wrote an influential letter to John Wentworth, and its leaders included John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff. This sect's officials include members of the Melchizedek and Aaronic priesthoods, and its offshoots include the Strangites. Its thirteen Articles of Faith are included in the Pearl of Great Price, and its central text was translated by its founder from golden plates revealed to him by the angel Moroni. After that founder's murder in Carthage, Illinois, Brigham Young emerged as its leader. For 10 points, name this Christian sect founded by Joseph Smith.", "Mormonism", "M"]
["The celebration of this doctrine was advocated in a letter by Peter Comestor in response to one attacking it written by St. Bernard, and this doctrine was defended with the axiom \"potuit, decuit, ergo fecit\", which originated from Eadmer. A feast celebrating this doctrine takes place on December 8, and in the papal bull Ineffabilis Deus, this doctrine was defined ex cathedra in 1854 by Pius IX. For 10 points, name this Catholic doctrine which maintains that the Virgin Mary was free from original sin.", "Immaculate Conception", "M"]
["This religious sect includes radical divisions called ghulat which ascribe divine attributes to their leaders, and one division of this sect established the Qarmatian dynasty and follows leaders given the title Aga Khan. Members of this sect make pilgrimages to the site of the Battle of Karbala, and another division of this sect believes that the state of concealment called ghaybah was assumed by the Mahdi in 878. Including the Isma'ilis and the Twelvers, For 10 points, name this smaller of the two major branches of Islam contrasted with Sunni.", "Shia Islam", "M"]
["In Sufism, this action is central to emphasizing rabitah, a link to one's Shaykh, and is called muraqabah, and other Islamic traditions pair this action with dhikr. This action is paired with mudras and may require a kammatthana in Eastern traditions, where it is divided into four jhanas and four samapattis and equated with samadhi. Coming in varieties including the breath-focused anapanasati and seated zazen, this action is often accompanied by the contemplation of koans and recitation of mantras. Central to Zen Buddhism, For 10 points, name this form of mental exercise.", "Meditation", "H"]
["This structure was destroyed may times during raids conducted by Ahmed Shah Abdali, and this complex exist three jujube trees of varying importance. The doors to the \"God's passageway\" in this building were recovered by Lord Ellenborough from the tomb of Mahmud of Ghazni and were allegedly stolen from during a raid on Somnath. The foundation stone for this structure was laid by the Sufi mystic Hazrat Mian Mir. The Akal Takht faces this building, and houses many of the administrative bodies that oversee this structure. One sacred act performed while entering this building sees devotees cup their hands to lift some water from the (*) Sarowar and sprinkle it over their heads. That sarowar in a lake that was dug during Amardas' tenure, and the construction of this complex was overseen by Arjun Dev. For 10 points, identify this building whose Palki houses the Guru Granth Sahib and is the holiest site of Sikhism.", "Harmandir Sahib", "H"]
["This figure was mentioned as one of the three most powerful swineherds of Britain for guarding the magical swine of Annwfn. Along with his stepfather, this figure was among seven survivors of Bran's failed attack on Matholwch. That same stepfather and this figure's wife helped to free this figure from a spell by capturing a mouse, who was actually the wife of Llywd. This figure had fallen under that spell when he touched a golden bowl after following a boar into a cave. This man, who was married to (*) Cigfa, was originally named Gwri by his foster father, Teirnon, because of his golden hair. Teirnon found this figure after he had been abandoned by Gnawl, who had stolen him while this figure's mother's attendant slept. To recuse themselves, those attendant's smeared dog's blood all of over his mother's face and claimed that she had eaten the baby. For ten points, name this son of Rhiannon and Pwyll, who ruled over Dyfed.", "Mabon ap Modron", "H"]
["One section in this book encourages believers to \"do everything without grumbling or arguing\" so that they might become \"like stars in the sky.\" The author of this book notes that he is \"being poured out like a drink offering,\" perhaps alluding to his imprisonment, while also mentioning Epaphroditus, who \"almost died for the work of Christ.\" The author also notes his reasons to have \"confidence in the flesh,\" such as his personal righteousness and zeal, although he concludes that whatever his gains he now considers (*) \"loss for the sake of Christ.\" The key themes of this biblical book are humility and joy, as exemplified by such pieces of advice as \"Do nothing out of selfish ambition\" and \"rejoice in the Lord always.\" The best known verse tells believers to \"continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling.\" For 10 points, name this sixth epistle of Paul, a letter written to a church located in eastern Macedonia.", "Epistle to the Philippians", "H"]
["An unusual conical green and white mosque named after this figure was the primary mosque in Kuwait before the construction of the Great Mosque. When imagined as the \"Eternal Weeper\", this person is said to be comforted by believers' sorrow in Shi'a tradition. This person was denied inheritance of the Fadak estate by a grandfather-in-law because he considered it sadaqa, or gift to charity. The tasbih prayer of this figure is usually recited after the namaz prayer of repentance and commemorates the poverty of (*) her early married life in Medina. This woman's husband ruled during the first fitna and defeated Aisha at the Battle of the Camel. This woman was the only surviving daughter of Khadijah, her father's first wife, and she was the mother of Hasan and Husayn by her husband, the last rightly guided calif. For 10 points, name this daughter of Muhammad and wife of the first imam, Ali, the namesake of a north African califate.", "Fatimah", "H"]
["Members of this organization were given an energy-blessed ceramic badge called a perusha, while its twenty rites included drinking the bathwater and brewed hair clippings of its founder, who reputedly gained the ability to levitate shortly after receiving visits from Shiva. That founder of this group published such texts as The Secret Prophecy of Nostradamus and the two-part Declaring Myself the Christ. This sect also published the Vajrayana Sacca, which claimed that its members could generate (*) plasma shields to protect themselves from a nuclear attack that its founder predicted would come at the hands of the United States in 1997. This religious group's most famous actions were carried out by puncturing newspaper-wrapped packages with sharpened umbrellas in 1995. For 10 points, identify this religious cult founded by Shoko Asahara, whose members carried out sarin gas attacks on the Tokyo subways.", "Aum Shinrikyo", "H"]
["After his troops were denied bread, this man told the men of Succoth that he would tear \"flesh with desert thorns and briers.\" He kept that promise and also destroyed the tower of Peniel shortly after defeating Zebah and Zalmunna. One of this man's sons killed seventy of his brothers and was himself killed shortly after a woman dropped a millstone on his head. This figure became known as (*) \"Jerub-Baal\" after he destroyed an altar to Baal. The father of Abimelech, this man used gold taken from his plunder to construct an ephod worshiped by Israelites. He had earlier requested a sign from God by \"putting out a fleece.\" For10 points, name this Biblical judge who confused and defeated the Midianites with the use of trumpets.", "Gideon", "H"]
["One publication associated with this faith was called The Bridal Call. An offshoot of this faith that began in Saskatchewan is called the \"Latter Rain\" movement, which preaches the coming of a group called \"Joel's Army.\" During one of the earliest incidents involving this faith in the United States, Charles Parham was asked to leave because of sexual and racial controversies, despite his status as a teacher of William Seymour, who preached this faith in Los Angeles. Adherents of this faith participated in 1906 ministries on Azusa Street, while one of its most famous churches is the International Church of the Foursquare Gospel. One of the most notable leaders of this faith was a woman who reported herself kidnapped in 1926. For 10 points, name this faith practiced by Aimee Semple McPherson, a branch of Christianity which places emphasis on the gifts of the Holy Spirit, such as speaking in tongues.", "Pentecostalism", "H"]
["Initiates in this religion go through such ceremonies as the \"crushing of leaves\" called the pile fey and a series of special baths with their old clothes on. This process is called the Kanzo ceremony. A symbol used in this faith to act as a beacon for the gods is called a veve. Priestesses in this faith are called mambos, while priests are called houngans. This religion has a supreme god named Bondye, but also has lesser beings like Papa Legba and Baron Samedi, which are called loas. For 10 points, name this syncretic religion that merges elements of West African and Catholic beliefs and is prominently practiced in the Caribbean, which may explain that big earthquake in Haiti.", "Voodoo", "H"]
["Gabriel explains a prophecy of Jeremiah to this work's title character, who is accompanied by Ananias, Misael, and Azarias. One character in this work dreams that the world is being filled up with pieces of a statue made of various materials that has been broken by a small stone. One tale in this book depicts a drunk king, who is startled upon seeing the words \"Mene, mene, teke, upharsin.\" This book contains an episode detailing the frauds of \"Bel and the Dragon\" as well as the tale of Belshazzar's Feast. For 10 points, name this book of the Bible, whose title character is thrown into a den of lions.", "Book of Daniel", "H"]
["Aspects of this religion's dietary plan such as eating raw fruit", "Nation of Islam", "H"]
["Participants are required to put on their best attire during the jumuah forms of this, and are always encouraged to express their heartfelt intention, called the", "Islam", "H"]
["One leader of this group gave the \"Salt Sermon\" to attack the dissident Oliver Cowdery. Its Quorum of the Twelve Apostles is outlined in the Doctrines and Covenants, which is part of this religion's \"Standard Texts,\" along with such works as The Pearl of Great Price. Members of this religion committed the Mountain Meadows Massacre after being kicked out of Nauvoo, which they had established before banning plural marriage. Its founder was visited by the angel Moroni who helped him discover its namesake Book, which was written on golden plates. For 10 points, name this religion codified by Joseph Smith and Brigham Young, based in Salt Lake City, Utah.", "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints", "H"]
["One figure in this book is troubled after he realizes that a man who had helped ward off an assassination plotted by Bigthana and Teresh remained unrewarded. The title figure summons the Eunuch Hathach to inquire about the predicament plaguing a cousin. The title figure is raised by the nephew of Abihail who refused to bow before a noble, and is captured after Vashti refuses to obey her husband. This book centers on a plot in which an Agagite draws lots to kill of a certain religious group. The title figure is chose as the Queen of Ahasureus, she helped ward off a plot of Haman to exterminate the Jews of Persia. For 10 points, identify this Biblical figure whose acts are celebrated on Purim.", "Guinness World Records", "H"]
["This religion's believers practice the Four Restraints and they adhere to right vision, knowledge, and conduct, or the ratnatraya. Followers perform the five-fold bow when they recite this religion's primary prayer, the Namokar Mantra. This religion reserves the highest level of its seven-tiered heaven for those who have obtained liberation, or moksha. It reveres twenty-four figures who have recaptured dharma and lead others towards enlightenment, and this religion requires adherence to ahimsa, or non-violence. For 10 points, name this non-violent Indian religion founded by the last tirthankara, Mahavira.", "Jainism", "H"]
["One sect of this religion was founded by Prince Emanuel Edwards.The Twenty-One Points served as the foundation for the Routinization of this religion, whose early leaders included Joseph Hibbert, Archibald Dunkley, and Leonard Howell. Members of this religion do not use the words \"me\" and \"you;\" instead they use \"I and I.\" This religion propounds a salt and condiment-free diet, part of its I-tal code which regards the body as a temple. It rejects the concept of a European Jesus, claiming that since Solomon was black, so was the Christ. For 10 points, name this religion that regards Haile Selassie as an incarnation of God, which is popular in Jamaica.", "Rastafari", "H"]
["This character collects an ephah of barley after asking a foreman in a field if she can glean behind a group of harvesters. One man who helps this character takes off his sandal as part of finalizing a deal to marry her. The first husband of this character is the brother of Kilion, the death of whom causes this character's sister-in-law Orpah to leave. This mother of Obed is given six measures of barley from a man after she lays down by that man and uncovers his feet. That action follows the instruction of this character's mother-in-law Naomi. For 10 points, name this woman of the Old Testament who is redeemed by Boaz.", "Ruth", "H"]
["A preface to this book claims that it is worth memorizing and consuming daily, like the \"daily bread of the soul.\" This book contains verses on \"patient continuance in well-doing\" and those who \"worketh not, but believeth,\" a central conflict to the Sola gratia versus Sola fide controversy. One theologian states that its usage of \"ho alazon\" does not imply a denunciation of hypocritical Jews. This book's author claims not to be \"ashamed\" and advances the idea that Jews and Gentiles are equal before God in the \"dual-covenant.\" For 10 points, name this Pauline epistle, the first one in order, in which Paul addresses a church in Italy.", "Sergius Paulus", "H"]
["This religion holds that digging nine holes surrounded by twelve furrows, filling the holes with water, and sprinkling the water ritually on an unclean man will exorcise evil beings. This belief system fears beings that can be thwarted by invocations to Zam, Atar, and Apas, or earth, fire, and water. A set of beings feared by this belief system cannot distinguish between truth and falsehood, known as asha and druj. This religion fears demons called Daevas, the avoidance of which is the subject of the Vendidad, which is part of the holy text called the Avesta. For 10 points, name this dualistic Persian religion that reveres Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["This holiday is often celebrated with comic plays and puppet shows called its namesake \"speils.\" This holiday can also involve singing the song \"Shoshanat Yaakov\" and eating Fazuelos. Many celebrants of this holiday also share gift baskets called \"Misloach manot.\" Another custom of this holiday is shaking a gragger during the reading of a story that includes the demotion of Vashti and the construction of giant gallows. This holiday, which is held on the fourteenth of Adar, celebrates the heroism of Mordecai and the death of the evil Haman. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday which and celebrates the story of Esther.", "Purim", "H"]
["An apocryphal story describes this figure harvesting a hundred bushels from a single grain. In one speech, he attacked people who \"hold on to the traditions of men,\" and his description of the end times is sometimes called the Olivet discourse. Abraham Lincoln quoted this man's assertion that \"a house divided cannot stand,\" and he withered a fig tree when it failed to provide him with fruit. One selection of this man's teachings is known as the Great Commission, and he gave a speech in the Upper Room. This man aided in the catching of 153 fish and was spotted on the Road to Emmaus after his death. For 10 points, name this religious figure who walked on water and was crucified.", "Jesus", "H"]
["One character in this book is the governor Tatnai, who is ordered to not disturb certain workers. This work's ninth chapter features news of mixed marriages, which culminates in the sending off of foreign wives and children. A literary chiasmus focusing on a celebration in Jerusalem is present in the Apocryphal \"Greek\" version of this text. After Zerubbabel leads a group of workers in this book, several Samaritans send a letter to Cambyses II to hinder their efforts. Joshua, exhorted by Haggai and Zechariah, orders the rebuilding of the Temple of Jerusalem, as permitted by Cyrus. For 10 points, name this Old Testament book often paired with Nehemiah.", "Book of Ezra", "H"]
["Members of this group use an acronym called \"SPICES\" to reflect \"Simplicity\" and \"Stewardship.\" Some members of this group drafted a statement of faith called the \"Richmond Declaration.\" Elias Hicks' faction sparred with the more \"Orthodox\" members of this group. Typically, worship services held by this group are \"unprogrammed,\" with long stretches of silence between every speaker. This group believes that believers have an \"inner light\" reflecting God's presence. For 10 points, name this order founded by George Fox, whose notable members included William Penn and whose colloquial name refers to their so-called habit of \"trembling\" before God.", "Quakers", "H"]
["This work contains a chapter opening with \"My child, you are not yet a brave and wise lover.\" Its third section consists of dialogues between a disciple and the voice of the title figure, and is called \"Internal Consolation.\" This work was influenced by the Brethren of the Common Life, and the larger trend of devotio moderna. From the invention of the printing press until the early twentieth century, this book trailed only the Bible in the number of copies in circulation. For 10 points, name this work about spiritual living, which was written sometime around 1400 and is often attributed to Thomas a Kempis.", "The Imitation of Christ", "H"]
["The state of Niyata Micchaaditthi, or permanent skepticism, is one of the garuka kinds of this concept. Kameesu and Paanaatipaata are examples of the ten akusala kinds of this concept, which is also divided into upabidaka, or obstructive, and upaghataka, or destructive types. According to Jainism, this concept causes tiny particles of dirt to impart le'sya, or color, to people's souls. This concept is mainly caused by avijja, or ignorance, and results in vipaka. Arhats do not accumulate new kinds of this concept, but are affected by past kinds. For 10 points, name this concept from Hinduism and Buddhism, the idea that people's intentional actions influence their future lives.", "Karma", "H"]
["Miguel Landivar spread rumors that this figure was an escaped convict to support Agostino Mainardi, who accused this person of heresy. This person had a vision of God telling him \"I will be propitious to you at Rome\" before he experienced an awakening while praying in a cave near Manresa. This mentor of Peter Faber and Diego Lainez expressed his belief that obedience was the pre-eminent virtue in his \"Letter on Obedience.\" Francis Xavier was a follower of this leader, who created a program of prayer and contemplation divided into four weeks in his Spiritual Exercises. For 10 points, name this founder of the Jesuits, a Spanish saint from Loyola.", "Ignatius of Loyola", "H"]
["One pope of this name believed Conrad of Marburg's lies that the Cathars worshiped Satan, causing him to issue the papal ball Vox in Rama. The first pope of this name sent Augustine of Canterbury to convert the Anglo-Saxons in England to Christianity. The eighth pope of this name called for the Third Crusade in 1187. The death of the eleventh pope of this name sparked the Western Schism in 1378. The seventh pope of this name issued the papal bull Dictatus Papae banning secular leaders from appointing church officials, sparking the investiture controversy. For 10 points, identify this name shared by a pope who ordered that only years divisible by four hundred were leap years, resulting in the adoption of his namesake calendar.", "Gregory", "H"]
["One of these figures has a name translating to \"Mother Whose Children are the Fish,\" as her progeny are uncountable. Another of these figures once walked through a town wearing a half-red, half-black hat to confuse villagers. Devotees of the religion that venerates these figures stand on their toes or rise up at the mention of one of them, who presides over the drumming ceremonies during which these figures may mount priests. In addition to Yemaya and the one who shares lightning and fire with Oya, Shango, these figures that are venerated in Umbanda and Candomble. For 10 points, identify these emissaries of Olodumare that are revered in Santeria.", "Orisha (disambiguation)", "H"]
["Erasmus was among the first to cast doubt on this figure's authorship of a set of commentaries on the Pauline epistles, but he did eulogize Satyrus in his sermon On the Death of a Brother. In response to the resistance posed by Symmachus, this figure wrote a letter outlining the hypocrisies of the pagan priesthood and his belief that voluntary virginity was the most honorable kind. This brother of Marcellina opposed the rebuilding of a synagogoue by Theodosius, whom he made perform penance after the massacre at Thessalonica. The spiritual predecessor to St. Augustine, for 10 points, identify this doctor of the Church and Bishop of Milan.", "Ambrose", "H"]
["The twenty-ninth section of this book compares believers in other gods to the fragile web created by a spider. This book's ninety-sixth section asserts that God created mankind from a clot of blood. This book's twenty-fourth section compares God to a shining lamp lit from a blessed tree in its \"Verse of Light.\" The ninety-ninth section of this book describes an earthquake on the day of judgment, and almost every section of this book begins with the Bismillah. This book's \"Sword verse\" exhorts believers to \"find and slay pagans,\" and sections of this book are divided into verses called ayat. Beginning with a section called \"the opening,\" for 10 points, name this book divided into suras, which was revealed in the seventh century by the angel Gibreel to Muhammad.", "Quran", "H"]
["An incident discussing the consumption of strangled meat in this book is used to explain why Christians do not have to keep kosher. One couple in this book withholds a portion of profit from a land sale and presents it as the entire amount. This book describes the story of Sapphira and Ananias and contains prohibitions against worshiping idols and fornicating. Most famously, this book describes the stoning to death of Stephen by a mob, a crime approved by Saul, who himself is converted to Christianity in its pages. For 10 points, name this Biblical book written by Luke, that recounts what happened to the twelve followers of Jesus Christ.", "Acts of the Apostles", "H"]
["The Troparion of this day sees an angel tell some \"myrrh-bearing women\" that myrrh is not good enough for Christ. One event on this day saw a speech in which crying women were told to \"weep for yourselves and for your children,\" and that barren women would be blessed one day. Events during it can be represented by the Via Dolorosa, which honors the actions of Saint Veronica and Simon of Cyrene. This day immediately follows another holiday which contains the traditional washing of the feet and is given the adjective \"Maundy.\" For 10 points, name this holiday which commemorates the day Jesus was crucified and takes place two days before Easter Sunday.", "Good Friday", "H"]
["In most schools of thought, this practice is invalidated if a person's clothing contains a spot of blood larger than a dirham coin. One type of this practice consists of a person bending over and grasping his knees with open palms, and this practice is preceded by raising hands to a person's ears or shoulders during takbir. Worshipers perform ruku and sujud during this practice, which is divided into types like fajr and zuhr. While performing this practice, worshipers face qibla and prostrate themselves on a mat. For 10 points, name this Pillar of Islam, the requirement that Muslims face Mecca and pray five times a day.", "Salah", "H"]
["Members of this group are exempt from the Pidyon HaBen ceremony that redeems others from priestly obligations. A document named for this group contains an additional Greek footnote describing the central figure's initiation to priesthood and the arrogance of that figure's descendants. Families of three members of this group, Kohath, Merari, and Gershon, were responsible for transporting the Tabernacle. This group's patriarch destroyed the city of Shechem with Simeon in response for the rape of Dinah, and his youngest daughter Jochebed gave birth to Miriam, Aaron, and Moses. For 10 points, name this tribe of Israel founded by the third son of Jacob and Leah.", "Levite", "H"]
["In a commentary on this text, Sayana developed an accurate estimate of the speed of light. Its tenth section contains a poem stating that neither being nor non-being existed before creation. Section 3.62.10 of this text, which contains the Nasadiya sukta, consists of a prayer beginning \"om bhur bhuvah svah.\" A hymn in this text is the first source for the Pururavas and Urvashi story. The Gayatri Mantra is found in this text, which is divided into ten mandalas, with one dedicated to soma. Consisting of hymns to Agni and Indra and named for the \"wisdom of the verses,\" for 10 points, identify this oldest Hindu sacred text, the earliest of the four Vedas.", "Rigveda", "M"]
["People who follow this religion claim that they serve Ginen and try to enter into konesans. In its mythology, fami- lies are guarded by Boli Shah, and the father figure is a white snake named Damballa. The supreme creator god is Bondye, but adherents pray towards spirits known as Lwas, which can be reached by appealing to Papa Legba. Varia- tions of this religion are associated with Benin and Haiti. Name this religion that, because of related practices in New Orleans, is believed by many Americans to allow people to harm each other by sticking pins in dolls.", "Voodoo", "M"]
["Believers in this religion disagree as to the gender of the nineteenth person to achieve enlightenment during the cur- rent cycle of time, Mallinath. Followers first attempt to eliminate delusion and then achieve perfect knowledge, vi- sions, and nature to become ahirants. One of its most important texts, which tells of the twenty-four Tirathankars (tir-uh-THAHNK-ars) who achieved complete enlightenment and is read each year during the Paryushana (pahr- yoo-SHAH-nah), is the Kalpasutra (kal-puh-SOO-truh). The most recent Tirathankar, generally considered the founder of this religion, was Vardhamana, who is also known as Mahavira. Name this Eastern religion which, like Hinduism and Buddhism, is closely associated with the concept of ahimsa, or nonviolence.", "Jainism", "M"]
["The Center for Security Policy calls this doctrine \"the Threat To America\", and it is the goal of three men in Eng- land who burned poppies during the Armistice Day silence. Newt Gingrich called for a national ban on this system even though it is already banned by the First Amendment, and Nevada Senate candidate Sharron Angle expressed concern that this system is used in Dearborn, Michigan as well as a Texas town that does not exist. Through its Save Our State Law, Oklahoma just became the first state to ban its implementation. Some people, conflating this system with halal, claim it is being imposed in Minnesota because certain cabbies refused to take passengers with alcohol and some supermarket checkers refuse to handle pork. Closely associated with Fiqh and practiced in Saudi Arabia, name this Islamic legal system.", "Hisbah", "M"]
["According to one story, this person found discrepancies when he made two witnesses separately describe a woman committing adultery, saving a woman named either Susanna or Shoshana. Earlier, he asked Arioch (ar-ee-OCK) why a decree was so hasty before conferring with Hananiah (ha-nuh-NAI-uh), Mishael, and Azariah (ah-ZAH-ree-uh), and he was able to claim, \"There is a God in heaven that reveals secrets.\" Those three friends, also known as Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, survived a fiery furnace. This person was originally given the name Belteshazzar, and he de- scribed a creature made of gold, silver, brass, iron, and clay to Nebuchadnezzar. He also interpreted the words menei menei teikel ufarseen at Belshazzar's feast; those words became known as \"the writing on the wall\". Identify this name- sake of a Biblical book who was thrown into the lions' den.", "Daniel", "M"]
["There is historical debate over whether or not this person was born during the Year of the Elephant and whether two men in white took something out of his abdomen when he was a young child. His father died returning home from Gaza before this person was born, and his mother Amina died when he was six. He is called the Seal of the Prophets, and his followers believe that he is the only prophet after Jesus. He prayed in a small cave on Mount Hira, where he claimed to have been visited by the angel Gabriel. At one point, fearing assassination, he traveled with his followers to Yathrib, now known as Medina, a pilgrimage known as the Hegira. Name this seventh century leader who dictated the Koran, the founder of Islam.", "Muhammad", "M"]
["This person broke the knowledge of God down into six parts, ending with the unity of the divine essence, and the knowledge of man into two parts, the second of which is his nature and powers. Two people who helped him were William Farel and Martin Bucer. Over fifty years after he died, this man's followers organized the Canon of Dort, a reaction against the Arminian Remonstrance, which supported doctrines such as irresistible grace, perseverance of the saints, and total depravity. One of this man's students was John Knox, the founder of Presbyterianism. Additionally, his namesake beliefs led to a break with the Church of England by the Puritans who settled the United States. Name this author of Institutes of the Christian Religion who was born in France and became a leader in Geneva, Switzerland.", "John Calvin", "M"]
["The importance of these acts increased in prominence during the twelfth century because of the writings of Peter Lombard and Hugh of Saint Victor, and the number of them was set in the sixteenth century at the Council of Trent. This term became associated with Christianity when the Greek word Mysterion was translated into Latin. Catholics claim that they are different than practices in other religions because they cause grace rather than signify grace. De- fined as an outward sign instituted by Christ to give grace, one of them before Vatican II was known as Extreme Unc- tion. Give the collective name for the practices of Anointing of the Sick, Holy Orders, Eucharist, Matrimony, Bap- tism, and Penance.", "Sacrament", "M"]
["In Yemen, many people believe that the fifth person to hold this title was Zayd ibn Ali rather than his brother Muhammad al-Baqir, and it used to be common to use this title to denote the leader of Yemen. This title generally takes less importance in Sunni as opposed to Shi'a Islam, but one of its Sunni uses is for the founders of the four madhhabs. In Shi'a Islam, where the Umayyad Caliphs were not recognized, this group of people is considered infalli- ble, starting with the Commander of the Faithful and ending with al-Mahdi, who will return with Jesus. Give this Is- lamic term which can also be used for a prayer leader.", "Imam", "M"]
["In the Book of Acts, a person with this name speaks after Barnabas and Paul at the Council of Jerusalem, saying that they should not make it difficult for Gentiles who are turning to God. The epistle bearing this name warns rich oppressors and tells Christians not to favor a guest with fine clothes over one with shabby clothes. Santiago de Com- postela in Spain is believed to house the remains of a saint by this name, the brother of John and son of Zebedee. Catholics believe that the son of Alphaeus and the ones called the Less and the Just are all the same person. Because of a passage in Galatians, a person with this name is sometimes considered to be the brother of Jesus. Give this name be- longing to two apostles.", "James", "H"]
["In a work attributed to Joseph of Arimathea, this figure is the only witness to the assumption of Mary. He had earlier urged Jesus' disciples to visit Lazarus so that \"we might die with him.\" Another apocryphal document records his miraculous escape from Gundafor's prison and his deeds as a missionary in (*) India. This man exclaimed \"My Lord and my God\" eight days after he declared that he would not believe that Jesus had risen. Sometimes called Didymus, for 10 points, identify this apostle who until actually touching the wounds of Christ famously doubted his resurrection.", "Thomas the Apostle", "H"]
["This practice, when performed weekly, represents the commandments of zakhor and shamor, or \"remember\" and \"observe.\" To commemorate the anniversary of a death, this action is performed with a namesake object during Yahrzeit. During one holiday, Ma'oz Tzur is sung after doing this action. It is performed during the Havdalah ceremony at the end of (*) Shabbat with a braided object and at least twice eighteen minutes before Shabbat begins on Friday night by the woman of the household. It is usually done from right to left using the shamash during the festival of lights. For 10 points, name this action performed nine times on the last day of Hanukkah, the creation of a ceremonial flame on an object such as a menorah.", "Mar Sleeva Syro-Malabar Church, Mapranam", "H"]
["According to the Talmud, Rabbi Akiva was a descendant of this figure's major foe. This figure's people suffered for twenty years under the rule of Jabin, whose army was defeated by a man this biblical figure had sent to Mount Tabor. The river Kishon figured into a key victory for this lover of Lapido, who called upon Barak to amass an army to defeat (*) Sisera, a Canaanite general who was eventually killed with a tent stake by Jael. This figure dispensed advice from under a palm tree between Ramah and Bethel, and her story is described for a second time in her namesake \"song.\" For 10 points, name this prophetess, the only female judge in the Book of Judges.", "Deborah", "H"]
["A precursor celebration and namesake of this holiday involves women sipping cannabis-laden thandai while beating men with sticks called lathis. One version of this holiday involves the construction of human pyramids to reach and break a pot of butter, emulating the mischief of its central figure, who grew up in Vrindavan and Mathura, where this holiday is celebrated for 16 days. Prahlada survived on a pyre while this holiday's namesake (*) demoness burned to death due to her devotion to Vishnu. Vishnu's avatar Krishna plays pranks on the gopis, who react by throwing abir, this holiday's famed colored powder. For 10 points, name this spring festival of Hinduism.", "Holi", "H"]
["One outgrowth of this religion was established by Vinitaruci and led to the founding of the Truc Lam and Lie Quan schools. Its followers may experience hallucinations called makyo during attempts to realize their true emptiness. That practice, kensho, often occurs during regimented sesshin, or group (*) meditation. This religion claims that it originated from the Flower Sermon, and it was founded by the Chinese monk Bodhidharma. In the country in which it is most popular, it is divided into Soto and Rinzai sects that differ on how to achieve satori. For 10 points, name this school of Mahayana Buddhism that emphasizes meditation on paradoxical koans and is popular in Japan.", "Zen", "H"]
["One prophecy about this figure claims that he will come and turn fathers and children back towards each other lest they risk a smiting from God. This figure sent a letter that warned King Jehoram of his impending violent death after this man traveled to a cave in Mount Sinai and complained to God that he was the only faithful person left. While at the Cherith stream, this man was fed by (*) ravens while hiding from a king whose family he would curse to be eaten by dogs. He prophesied the death of that king's son, Ahaziah, after Naboth's vineyards were seized by this man's enemy, Jezebel, in the name of her husband Ahab. For 10 points, name this Baal-hating Hebrew prophet who mentored Elisha and was taken into heaven in a chariot of fire.", "Elijah", "H"]
["After the execution of this group's leader Michael Sattler, this group accepted the Schleitheim Confession as their official doctrine. One faction of this group legalized polygamy when John of Leyden took over Munster and introduced this group's doctrines as the town's law. This group included the Zwikau Prophets, initiated the (*) Radical Reformation, and saw a subdivision founded by Dutch ex-priest Menno Simons. This denomination, which includes Mennonites and the Amish, divides its namesake practice into \"spirit\" and \"fire\" types in addition to the usual \"water\" form. For 10 points, name this group that broke with the Lutherans over a certain sacrament reserved by this group for adults but administered by other Protestants and Catholics to infants.", "Anabaptists", "H"]
["This man asserted that the only object men should enjoy is the Trinity in a work that examines the different types of ambiguous signs that can prevent the full understanding of Scripture. Another work by this man claims that good angels wish that sacrificial power be directed to God alone in a work that contests the scapegoating of a certain group for a certain military action. This figure describes a pivotal experience stealing from a (*) pear orchard in a work heavily influenced by Ambrose of Milan; that work sees this man relate how a child's voice instructed him to read the Bible and reject Manichaeism in favor of the Christianity of his mother Monica. For 10 points, name this Church Doctor and Bishop of Hippo who wrote City of God and Confessions.", "Augustine of Hippo", "H"]
["This man's oration on the death of King Follett contains controversial assertions about the doctrine of exaltation, while he related his experience of the \"grove vision\" in the Wentworth Letter. This man claimed to have been baptized by John the Baptist along with Oliver Cowdery, with whom he authored a text containing instructions on the baptism of the dead, Doctrines and Covenants. That work also relates this man's order to construct a (*) \"Zion\" in Jackson County and describes the overtaking of Nauvoo, Illinois, where this man was killed. This man was aided by Urim and Thummim in translating a work that was written in \"Reformed Egyptian\" on golden plates and shown to him by the angel Moroni. For 10 points, name this man who founded the LDS Church and translated the Book of Mormon.", "Joseph Smith", "H"]
["This practice requires a patchwork floral headdress called a Sehra in some traditions, while in Mormonism it relies on the creation of the \"Sure Sign of the Nail.\" This practice is performed with a white rooster representing the dead in the Chinese tradition of Minghun. Failure to complete this practice leaves one at risk for committing Zena in Islam. In Hinduism, this practice involves the (*) circling of a sacred fire seven times. The Shidduch system facilitates it in Judaism, which permits its practitioners to later present a get. Various traditions associated with this practice include handfasting, broom-jumping, and the smashing of a wine glass, while the Unification Church of Sun Myung Moon conducted notorious \"mass\" versions. Associated with the payment of a dowry, for 10 points, identify this religious ceremony often involving a symbolic ring exchange.", "Marriage", "H"]
["Texts important to this denomination include one that contains the Parable of the Burning House, which illustrates its concept of upaya. A subgroup of this denomination believes that chanting the name of its founder will lead to rebirth in Sukhavat, a serene paradise. This denomination, which includes the Amitabha-founded (*) Pure Land School, focuses not on arhats but on enlightened figures that reject nirvana in favor of helping others achieve Buddhahood. The veneration of bodhisattvas is fundamental to, for 10 points, what \"Greater Vehicle\" practiced heavily in East Asia, one of the major schools of Buddhism along with Theravada?", "Mahayana", "H"]
["Prior to receiving the darshana of Venkateswara at Tirupati, devotees perform this action as a symbol of their devotion to Balaji. In some regions, it is performed during the upanayana rite-of-passage ceremony, though a portion called the shikha is left intact in a practice called cudakarana. According to the Book of Leviticus, lepers had to undergo this action as a part of a (*) cleansing ritual. The principle of Kesh precludes the performance of this action by devout Sikhs, also forbidden for the Jewish Nazarite sect. The Book of Judges describes how a man was blinded and lost his strength after undergoing this at the hands of Delilah. For 10 points, identify this activity in which a keratinaceous tissue was removed from the head of Samson.", "George Lazenby", "H"]
["A prominent phrase associated with this figure was adopted from a favorite taunt of the mythical Puck, while he is syncretized with John the Baptist and Uncle Sam into the deity John Frum. Joseph Stalin mandated blue iconography for Ded Moroz to avoid conflation with this figure, who is aided in some traditions by a young man in blackface named Peter. This figure is linked with a man venerated for providing a dowry for three poor girls as Bishop of (*) Myra. In Germanic tradition, he is joined by a horrifying demon who roams the streets and assaults women, Krampus. This figure's supposed activities coincide with a traditional Catholic midnight mass at the culmination of Advent. Comet and Dancer aid, for 10 points, what North Pole resident who serially trespasses through chimneys on Christmas?", "Santa Claus", "H"]
["This results in embodiment of either bhavya or abhavya depending on one's faith according to one tradition. Sikhs who undergo this process do not have to become mendicants as long as they live solely for others, in contrast to the Jain notion of the Siddhis who have become ascetics. The four margas, or paths for (*) achieving this goal, are enumerated in the Raja, Yana, Bhakti, and Karma Yogas. Arivata guards righteous souls not prepared for this process in the realm of Svarga, where the await the liberation of their dukkha, or suffering. For 10 points, identify this concept in Indic religion, the release of one's soul from the cycle of samsara.", "Moksha", "H"]
["If this action is not performed, one may compensate by caring for a poor person or making a bequest in a wasiyat, and it is interrupted by waking for a sahri. This action does not occur on the three days of Tashreek, and it can be voluntarily done on the first nine days of Zil-haj.", "Fasting", "H"]
["In Eastern Rite Churches, this practice occurs during the epiklesis of the anaphora and can be first practiced immediately after chrismation. This practice is referred to as \"oblation\" by the Oriental Orthodox, while the Mennonite form of this practice is often preceded by footwashing. Catholics often use a monstrance to display the elements of this practice for (*) adoration, and many Protestant churches allow for one component of it to be replaced with mustum. Different interpretations of the Real Presence in this practice, whose name means \"thanksgiving,\" include consubstantiation and transubstantiation. For 10 points, name this Christian sacrament that celebrates Jesus' transformation of bread and wine into his body and blood at the Last Supper.", "Eucharist", "H"]
["This religion's place in America was explicated in a letter by this religion's only Guardian. A book by the son of this religion's founder, Will and Testaments, outlines the rules for the Spiritual Assemblies of this religion that are subordinate to an organization created after the Ten Year Crusade. The journey of the soul in this religion through the titular amount of stages is described in The Seven Valleys. The supreme body of this religion founded by Shoghi (*) Effendi is called the Universal House of Justice. This religion holds that progressive revelation has occurred though ten different Manifestations of God, including Jesus and Muhammad, while its belief in the unity of God, humanity, and religion was first preached by the Bab. For 10 points, name this religion founded by Baha'u'llah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["The earliest mention of this being employed in its most famous context is found in the Or Zarua, and it appears at a siyum to commemorate the completion of a tract of Talmud. A line beginning \"let it be accepted\" was added to it in Talmudic times. The half, or \"Chatzi\" version divides various sections of the service. It opens with the words (*) \"May his great name grow exalted and sanctified.\" Although it is mostly in Aramaic, the Hebrew \"Oseh Shalom\" is sometimes appended to it. For 10 points, name this Jewish prayer, one version of which is recited by mourners to commemorate the dead.", "Kaddish", "H"]
["This man was said to have been shielded from harsh sunlight by a coiled, poisonous cobra as he herded buffalo as a child. This man began the practice of providing free food at religious ceremonies, called langar. His followers practice Nam Japo, the first of the three pillars outlined by this author of the Baburvani. During one of this man's journeys, he was questioned why his feet pointed toward the (*) Kaaba and responded by declaring that \"God is everywhere\". This man's corpse supposedly dissolved into flowers, and he was succeeded by figures like Arjun Dev, Govind Singh, and eventually by the Adi Granth. Asserting \"there is no Hindu, there is no Muslim,\" for 10 points, name this first guru of Sikhism.", "Guru Nanak", "H"]
["This book sees one figure rescue his relative from the King of Shinarand before being blessed by a priest of \"God the most high\" named Melchizedek. Another figure in this book is almost seduced by Abimelech while disguised as her husband's sister, while yet another is dressed up in goatskins to fool his blind father into blessing him. That man spends fourteen years working for (*) Laban in order to marry his two daughters, Rachel and Leah. Another man in this book sees his son sent to the Land of Nod; that man also named the animals before being a serpent and his wife tempted him to eat from the Tree of Knowledge. For 10 points, name this book that features Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as well as Adam and Eve, the first book of the Bible.", "Book of Genesis", "H"]
["Figures like James Nayler and Margaret Fell appear on a 77-panel tapestry venerated by this faith, which is divided over the legitimacy of the Richmond Declaration. Elias Hicks labeled the urban, Orthodox members of this faith as \"too worldly,\" leading to his exile in New York. This denomination does not honor the exclusivity of the Sabbath, or First Day. Its traditional service consists of (*) \"unprogrammed worship\" in weekly meetings, during which any believer can break the silence and preach in order to guide the congregation toward the \"inner light\" of God. Founded by George Fox and practiced by William Penn, for 10 points, identify this non-violent Protestant denomination that emphasizes plain dress and language.", "Quakers", "H"]
["This book sees Phillip the Evangelist, one of a group of seven figures, convert a man who attempts to trade magical abilities for money. That character, Simon Magus, is admonished by a man who is released from prison by an angel in this book. Another man in this book is mistaken for a Greek god by the Lystrans along with his companion (*), Barnabas. That man begins this book by killing converts before he is converted on the road to Damascus. This New Testament book also tells of the stoning of the first deacon, Stephen, and, like the Book of Luke, it begins with a dedication to Theophilus. For 10 points, name this book of the Bible that appears after the Book of John and relates the deeds of the titular group, which includes Paul and Peter.", "Acts of the Apostles", "H"]
["The name by which this", "The", "H"]
["Before becoming a bishop, Eusebius of Dorylaeum was part of the early opposition to this belief, which was recognized by the Tang Emperor Taizong in the 7th", "Nestorianism", "H"]
["For a Lie algebra, this term defines the set of all elements a such that, for all elements in the algebra, the commutation operation between a and any of those elements yields zero. On a graph, this point is sometimes named for Jordan and is the set of all vertices with minimal eccentricity. Euler lines by definition pass through this point of the nine-point circle. In group theory, this term applies to the members of a group that commute with every other member and is often denoted Z, while the altitudes of a triangle meet at the point called the ortho- this. For 10 points, give this name, which, in geometry defines a position whose distance from the edge of a circle is the radius, since it is exactly in the middle.", "Center", "H"]
["While this man was dying, he urged the king to shoot arrows out of a window, and became angry when the king only fired three times. This man had previously cursed his greedy servant Gehazi for dishonestly taking reward money from a Syrian. This man's curse made Gehazi inherit the leprosy which that Syrian, Naaman, once had. When attacked by Ben-Hadad, this man was protected by the spiritual \"chariots of fire.\" Miracles this man performed was multiplying the oil possessed by a poor widow and calling upon bears to maul youths who made the mistake of calling this man a \"baldhead.\" This man was given a double portion of his mentor's spirit, enabling him to perform more miracles than that man, who ascended into heaven in a chariot. For 10 points, name this successor to Elijah, whose miracles and deeds are recorded in the Biblical book of Second Kings.", "Elisha", "H"]
["In its 25th", "Number", "H"]
["Special prayers are read before a sacred pillar dedicated to one of these people near al-Rawdah in Masjad-e-Nabawi. Two of them were declared unfaithful when they fed a man honey out of jealousy to dissuade him from visiting another of these figures named Hind bint Abu Ummayah. The first person to fulfill this role was nicknamed \"al Kubra\" and may have been the first Muslim convert. That woman was the grandmother of Hussein by virtue of her daughter Fatima, while another of these women was a daughter of Abu Bakr that may have taken on this position to solidify family relations, allowing her father to be the successors of Islam. For 10 points, give this position held by Aisha and Khadija, as well as several other women distinguished by their marital status to the Prophet of Islam.", "The Six Wives of Henry VIII", "H"]
["In one incident, this figure correctly read the mind of Daulat Khan, who was thinking of buying horses in Arabia rather than praying. After a religious experience in the Kali Bein, this man went on a series of travels with Mardana that are documented in the Janamsakhis. In another documented incident, this man slept with his feet towards the Kaaba, justifying it by stating that God is everywhere. Upon his death, his friends were conflicted as to where they should place flowers around his body but later found only flowers in place of his body. This man famously declared that \"there is no Hindu and no Muslim\", laying the foundations for a certain religion. The teachings of that religion are contained in the Adi Granth, a collection of this man's sayings. For 10 points, identify this first guru of Sikhism.", "Guru", "H"]
["One of the lesser laws of this day, according to the Shulchan Aruch is that one is not allowed to wash past the knuckles, while, as on their wedding and burial duys, men wear a white robe called a kittel. In the days of the Temple, the Kohen Gadol would wash his hands and feet a total of ten times, sacrifice a goat for Azazel, wear five sets of clothing and pronounce the name of Hashem", "Yom Kippur", "H"]
["According to St. Hippolytus of Rome's", "Exorcism", "H"]
["Preparation for this action typically involves going to a", "Hajj", "H"]
["It inspired works by both Ravel and Bernstein, and all but the Hatzi version of it conclude with lines inspired by the first verse of Job 25. Although there exist Complete and Rabbi's versions of it, the most popular version was recited in the final act of Tony Kushner's", "Kaddish", "M"]
["The Qur'an gives its name as tariq which in the Sufi tradition means \"deliverer of messages\". In Norse mythology, it is called Aurvandil because Aurvandil's wife Groa cured Thor of a horn stuck in his head. To reward her, Thor took Aurvandil's toe which had frozen off and cast it into the heavens where it became this. In Old English the name is rendered Earendel and was also apparently a deity conflated with Christ in the Exeter Book. In Greek mythology, it refers to Eosphorus, a son of Eos, who is scientifically the same object as his nocturnal twin Hesperus. Eosphorus, Hesperus, and their Latin equivalent are all used to translate the name of Helel, a proud Babylonian king in the Bible, by ancient translators, causing confusion with a more important Biblical character also bearing this name. For 10 points, what is this celestial object associated with the Devil in Christian demonology?", "Morning Star (British newspaper)", "M"]
["She is praised in the First Epistle of Peter for her obedience. The Old Testament holds that she was her husband's half-sister through their father Terah, while the Talmud equates her with Iscah, her husband's niece through his brother Haran. Her husband attempted to smuggle her into Egypt by hiding her in a chest, but she was caught at the border inspection. Luckily, she was beautiful enough to enamor the pharaoh, convincing him that her husband was actually her brother. As a gift, the pharaoh gave his daughter to her as a slave; that slave would later become her rival. Her death was either caused by grief that her son was dead or joy upon learning that her son had not actually been sacrificed. Before the birth of that son, her husband had fathered Ishmael with her slave Hagar. For 10 points, name this woman from the Book of Genesis, the mother of Isaac and the wife of Abraham.", "Sarah", "M"]
["This work claims that heirs are no different than slaves when they are minors and in the final chapter of this book the author refers to the large size of his own handwriting to affirm it was not written by a scribe. Chapter Four of this book uses Hagar and Sarah as an allegory for two types of covenant. Earlier, this work calls Peter a hypocrite for refusing to dine with Gentiles in James' presence. This work claims that in Christ \"there is no Greek or Jew...or male or female\" and this work was written to people of the titular location to denounce their practice of circumcision. For 10 points, identify this book of the New Testament in which it is written that Jewish ritual practices are unnecessary for salvation, an epistle of Paul to a region in central Asia Minor.", "Epistle to the Galatians", "M"]
["One form of it worships an androgynous, neutral god of space and time named Zurva. Crucial to the survival of this religion was the migration from Sanjan to Gujarat and its key concepts include the rejection of monasticism and predestination along with the 3rd savior named Saoshyant being born from a bathing virgin mother. This religion considers the Ahuna Vairya the most sacred of a series of 17 hymns. To not pollute earth or fire, this religion lets carrion birds eat corpses on top of Towers of Silence. Sraosha is one of the three guardians of the Chinvat bridge that all the dead must cross in this religion. The Gathas form a major part in this religion's holy book, the Avesta. For 10 points, name this religion featuring Ahriman and Ahura Mazda founded by a Persian prophet.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["In the Epistle of Barnabas, this act is considered a prefiguration of Christ's crucifixion, because the number 318 in Greek, TIH, resembles Christ on the cross according to the author. During the Reformation, Zwingli opposed Anabaptism, citing this practice as justification for infant baptism. This practice was forbidden in Eugenius IV's papal bull reuniting with the Coptic Church after the Council of Basel-Florence. Chapter 15 of Acts features an apostolic council where it was decided that this act was unnecessary, and in the fifth chapter of Galatians, Paul declares that Christians who have performed this act have \"fallen away from grace\". In the early church, this practice was associated with Jewish Christians, who were distinguished from Gentile Christians by it. Considered the foremost mark of the Covenant, this is, for 10 points, what practice whereby the foreskin is cut from the penis?", "Circumcision", "M"]
["In Islam, this man was considered to be extraordinarily beautiful and his father's blindness was cured when he touched what he was wearing to his father's eyes. In the Hebrew tradition, he was caught up in a plot by Potiphar's wife, and a promise to this man is forgotten by the king's cup bearer until two years later. At one points this man frames his younger brother Benjamin by placing a silver goblet in his bag and accuses him of stealing it. This man correctly interpreted a dream involving cows and ears of grain to mean that a famine is coming and advises the king to store grain. The eleventh of twelve sons of his father Jacob, for 10 points, identify this Biblical figure with a coat of many colors.", "Joseph", "M"]
["Melito of Sardis and other Quartodecimans celebrated this holiday on a different date, but the First Council of Nicaea decreed that it should follow the 14th day of a certain ecclesiastical month. The Exsultet is intoned during this holiday's traditional Church service, during which a large candle is lit. Forty days before Ascension Thursday and fifty days before Pentecost, it ends the period of Lent and occurs two days after Good Friday, on a Sunday. For 10 points, name this Christian holiday honoring the resurrection of Jesus, associated with brightly colored eggs.", "Easter", "M"]
["On this holiday, one prayer has the word kotvaynu replaced by khatmaynu, and the Ashamnu and Al Cheit are recited. Before the destruction of the Second Temple, the High Priest used to pronounce the Tetra", "Yom Kippur", "M"]
["This religion's priesthood includes the Quorum of Seventy, and it worships the Godhead. Its Articles of Faith are included in The Pearl of Great Price. Supposedly written in \"reformed Egyptian,\" the golden plates of the angel Moroni were the basis of this religion's sacred text. Its largest church is that of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, and Joseph Smith and Brigham Young were among its leaders. For 10 points, name this Utah-based Christian denomination which no longer condones polygamy.", "Mormons", "M"]
["This text's 24th chapter proscribes the punishment for zina and tells of a niche containing a lamp lit from the oil of a blessed olive tree. Verse 255 of its second chapter discusses a \"Kursi,\" or throne, while another part tells of the Isra and Mi'raj, or the \"night journey.\" Its ninth chapter contains the sword verse and is notable for not starting with the Bismillah. Beginning with Al-Fatiha and ending with An-Nas, the Hadith supplements its interpretation. Containing 114 suras, Jibril revealed it to Muhammad. For 10 points, name this sacred text of Islam.", "Quran", "M"]
["This book's 16th chapter mentions sending goats to Azazel and Hashem. One part tells of Nadab and Abihu's offering of \"unholy fire,\" for which they were burned to death. Chapters 1-7 discuss offerings, 11-16 discuss cleanliness, and chapter 18 forbids incest. Chapter 19, verse 28 states \"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself,\" and chapter 18, verse 22 states \"Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind,\" cited by some as a condemnation of homosexuality. Containing Priestly and Holiness Codes, for 10 points, name this third book of the Old Testament.", "Book of Leviticus", "M"]
["The wife of this book's antagonist proposes the construction of a gallows ten cubits high. Bigtan and Teresh attempt to poison the king, who promises the title character any request, up to half the kingdom. Vashti refuses to show her beauty at a drunken party and is banished. The title character replaces her as Ahasuerus' queen, while her uncle Mordechai falls into disfavor with the would-be Jew murderer Haman. For 10 points, name this book of the Tanakh read aloud during Purim.", "Book of Esther", "M"]
["One of this religion's holy texts numbers Search, Unity, and Wonderment among its \"Seven Valleys.\" It observes a 12-day festival commemorating a visit to the Naji", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["One of these figures was imprisoned from the age of four, and impressed his fellow prisoners with his religious devotion. His father, also one of these, has a shrine devoted to him in Askari. One sect believes that these figures, all directly related to each other, were the infallible spiritual successors to Muhammad. Twelver Shi'ism holds that one of these people was hidden in the Occultation, and will eventually return as the Mahdi. Ruhollah Khomeini, the Supreme Leader of Iran, was one of these. For 10 points, name this position of leadership in Islam.", "Imam", "E"]
["One biblical figure with this name is Clopas's wife. Another woman with this name, with Salome, is a daughter of Joachim and Anne. That woman is the subject of the bull \"Ineffabilis Deus,\" and is the only woman mentioned in the Qur'an. Two women of this name (*) bathed Jesus' feet in oil. This cousin of Elizabeth learns from the angel Gabriel that she is the product of an immaculate conception and must marry Joseph. Give this first name shared by prostitute Magdalene and the mother of Christ.", "Mary", "E"]
["This figure considered a meal given to him by a blacksmith to be his favorite, even though he got fatal food poisoning. A dream of an elephant piercing his mother's side foretold his birth. Predicted to be a great leader by the seer Asita, he was inspired by the Four Passing Sights to give up his princely life and experiment with asceticism before deeming moderation to be the best. After meditating under a (*) bodhi tree, he awoke enlightened about things like the Four Noble Truths and and the Eightfold Path. Name this founder of a namesake Asian religion.", "Gautama Buddha", "E"]
["According to one story, this figure's heart was cleaned in a gold basin while he was a child. His caretaker at one point was Halimah, and one classification of his helpers were known as the Ansar. He employed clever defense tactics at the Battle of the Ditch. According to tradition, he was instructed to (*) read by an angel, but stated that he was unable to do so. His sayings are collectively known as Ahadeeth. Name this man who married Khadija and was the final prophet of Islam.", "Muhammad", "E"]
["The title of a work by Sigmund Freud pairs this concept with Moses. Denying this is the foremost sin in Islam, shirk, and the Sh'ma in Judaism is a proclamation of this doctrine. Despite the importance of Angra Mainyu, Zoroastrianism is usually defined as this. During the Amarna period, Akhenaten advocated a form of this called (*) Atenism. The concept of Brahman makes this concept apply to Hinduism, and Christianity's Trinity is a complex form of this. Name this religious concept of belief in only a single god.", "Monotheism", "E"]
["In the Talmud, a man with this name is the son of Pandeira, and is condemned to death by the Sanhedrin. He is classified in Baha'i as a Manifestation of God, and in Islam, he spoke out as a baby, saying that he would reveal the Injeel. He was raised up to heaven alive, though he will eventually descend to slay the Dajjal. In Christianity, he was killed by the Romans at (*) Calvary. Islam and Christianity agree that he was conceived immaculately by the Virgin Mary. Identify this Abrahamic religious figure, worshiped primarily by Christians as the Messiah.", "Jesus", "E"]
["This practice is the subject of Paul VI's \"Mysterium Fidei.\" In some traditions, this practice features the recitation of the Words of Institution and a process called intinction. It is preceded by the Fraction Rite in Catholicism and is considered, according to the Council of Trent, to include (*) transubstantiation. Usually first administered to eight-year-old children after their first reconciliation, name this Christian reenactment of the Last Supper in which Christ's body and blood are distributed in the form of bread and wine.", "Eucharist", "E"]
["In this religion, the spirits of the dead can be contained in a govi jar. High-ranking priests of this religion are called aswogwe, while low-ranking male and female ones are called houngans and mambos, respectively. Liaisons between this world and the supreme god, Bondye, include Simbi and are known as (*) loa [LOW-uh], one of whom named Papa Legba can create zombies. Name this syncretic Haitian religion which really doesn't use the pain-causing dolls that bear its name.", "Voodoo", "E"]
["This holiday's observations include the singing of \"Mi Yih-maleil\" and \"Ma'oz Tzur.\" One object used on this holiday is inscribed with an acronym for \"nes gadol hayah sham\" and is spun in a game to win (*) gelt; another object has a place for the shamash, which is used to light up to eight other candles. Comemmorating the miracle of the Temple menorah after the overthrow of Antiochus by Judah Maccabee, name this Jewish winter holiday featuring dreidels and latkes.", "Hanukkah", "E"]
["The homeland of this religion was created when its founding gods stood on a rainbow and dipped a spear into the primordial waters. One of those gods, Izanagi, later failed to rescue his wife from Yomi, the underworld of this religion. Shrine entrances of this religion are marked by Torii, and the sun goddess (*) Amaterasu is said to be the ancestor of the ruling family of this religion's homeland. Notable for the worship of kami, spirits that inhabit all living things, name this national religion of Japan.", "Shinto", "E"]
["This man fought a war with Ish-bosheth, which he won once Abner joined his side. He was exiled among the Philistines after marrying Michal, and a Jewish tradition states that the Messiah will be descended from him. He gained one wife after having Uriah the Hittite killed, and another of his wives was the sister of his friend (*) Jonathan, who warned him of Saul's attempt to have him killed. With his wife Bathsheba, he fathered Solomon. Name this king of Israel who built the First Temple and slayed Goliath.", "David", "H"]
["Alexius Comenus tasked Euthymius Zigabenus, a preparer of The Panoply, to refute the beliefs of this sect, who believed that the symbol of the cross is to be abhorred rather than venerated. Followers were divided into the slushateli, viarvashti and savarsheni. The earliest existing record of their theology comes in a work written in Staro-Slavic by St. Kozma and the name of this group means \"Dear to God.\" This sect rejected a pessimistic form of Paulician dualism, holding that everything, save the human soul, was created by Satan, the elder brother of Jesus. The Eastern European precursors of the Cathars, for 10 points, name this Gnostic dualistic sect emerging in Bulgaria in the 10th century.", "Bogomilism", "H"]
["One can use a bedikah to determine if a person is still in this state. Many of the rules related to this condition are described in Leviticus 15:19-30, and an abnormal version of this is known as Zavah. The name for this is used in the description of the red heifer ceremony in reference to the \"waters of sprinkling, and Abraham ibn Ezra suggests that this condition is related to menadekkem which means \"to be cast out.\" Also naming the Talmudic section concerning laws regarding sexual relations, such relations are forbidden in this state. Typically lasting for seven days after which a mikveh may be performed, for 10 points, name this term from Judaism that means \"separation\" and generally refers to the state in which a Jewish woman is considered ritually impure due to her menstrual cycle.", "Niddah", "H"]
["The beginning of this letter notes that \"in these last days [God] has spoken to us through his son... by whom He also made the worlds.\" This book written from Italy says that hope is a sure and steadfast anchor for the soul. This book of the New Testament asserts that Christ is a priest in the order of Melchisidec. Christians are urged to \"fix [their] eyes on Jesus\" based on being \"surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses.\" In chapter eleven, it contains a large section which recounts the trials that many heroes of the Old Testament went through. Containing the \"Hall of Faith,\" it makes known that there is still no reason to convert back to Judaism. For 10 points, identify this book of the Bible with a decidedly anonymous author that is addressed to the chosen people of God.", "Epistle to the Hebrews", "H"]
["One incarnation of this goddess was the sister of Rukmi, who opposed her marriage to a man her father, Bhishmaka, her fiance's elder brother Balarama supported. That tale is described in the Bhagavad Purana. Another avatar of this goddess who also marries that fiance has a relationship with him, which features both svakiya-rasa and prakiya-rasa, or married and mental love. Another avatar of this goddess is rescued by the sage Valmiki while in exile and is the mother of Kusha and Lava before finding sanctuary with the Goddess Mother Earth Bhumnidevi. For 10 points, name this Hindu goddess whose avatars include Radha and Rukimi, who marry Krishna, as well as Sita, the Hindu goddess of beauty and light.", "Lakshmi", "H"]
["One character has a tradition of giving chocolate to the girl's pool, and another claims to be dumber than an eight year old because she doesn't know what a charlatan is. The crazy Knowles operates the mayonnaise elevator number five. Hazels' obsession with Hoosiers is an example of a false karass, while the ambassador Horlick and his wife Claire represented a duprass; Horlick was later fired for his comments regarding Americans. Frank, who stages bug fights and was known as secret agent X-9, and Newt, who is shorter than an umbrella stand, are the sons of Dr. Hoenikker, whose central invention of the novel was originally developed for marines. Featuring the banana republic of San Lorenzo and the religion of Bokononism, for 10 points, name this Vonnegut novel about ice-nine, which takes its name from a string game played by Dr. Hoenikker.", "Cat's Cradle", "H"]
["Problems in translating these two texts include the meaning of the term \"katechon,\" which means either \"the power that restrains lawlessness\" or \"an agent of Satan.\" That term appears near a passage that reminds listeners that the end of the world will not come until after the \"lawless man\" is revealed. Both John Smith and Vladimir Lenin used as a slogan a passage from one of these texts, \"He who does not work, neither shall he eat.\" The first of these texts also condemns the mourning of the dead, because the dead will be resurrected. Usually placed between Colossians and First Timothy, this pair of texts is notable for the lengthy thanksgivings which open each one. For 10 points, identify these New Testament epistles, addressed to converts made by Paul in Macedonia.", "Five Pauline Epistles, A New Translation", "H"]
["An angelic being who talks to this figure describes battling \"the prince of Persia\" and \"the prince of Greece.\" Gabriel tells this man that \"seventy 'sevens' are decreed\" to atone for wickedness. This figure told Ashpenaz that he would not eat royal food and wine. He interpreted a ruler's dream by proclaiming that king would live like a wild beast. He also interpreted the words \"Mene, Mene, Tekel, Parsin\" at Belshazzar's feast. Three of this man's friends managed to survive being thrown into a fiery furnace by Nebuchadnezzar. For 10 points, name this Biblical prophet who, in his namesake book, survives being thrown into a lion's s den.", "Daniel", "H"]
["This figure healed a paralyzed man named Aeneas in Lydda, and in Joppa, he resurrected the dressmaker Dorcas. In Galatians, Paul tells of rebuking this man in Antioch for insisting on the circumcision of Gentiles. This man requested that Jesus wash his face and hands as well as his feet, and in Matthew, he momentarily walks on water. This man was called by Jesus along with his brother Andrew while fishing, and after Jesus' arrest, this apostle denied him three times. For 10 points, name this leader of the Apostles, the first Pope who has a namesake Basilica in the Vatican.", "Saint Peter", "H"]
["Participants in one purification ritual in this religion touch the left ear of a dog to drive out evil spirits. Its adherents believe that wicked souls will be dragged by a demon into the House of Lies while virtuous souls will be allowed entrance into the House of Songs after successfully crossing Chinvat. A tree that begat the first man and woman sprang from the body of this religion's first human, Gayomart. One sect of this faith worships the indifferent manifestation of time, Zurvan. Dead adherents of this faith are sometimes eaten by vultures after being placed in Towers of Silence. For 10 points, name this religion centering on the conflict between Ahriman and Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["One practice of this group is the ordinance of humility, a footwashing ceremony that occurs during communion. This faith's Glacier View Controversy caused a schism over one of its 28 Fundamental Beliefs, which include the remnant church and the creation of a new earth at the end times. After breaking with this faith, David Koresh formed the Branch Davidians. Many members of this faith hold that believers have been under constant \"investigative judgment\" since William Miller's failed prediction in 1844 that ended in the \"Great Disappointment\". For 10 points, name this Protestant religion that wrongly predicted the Second Coming and that observes its Sabbath on Saturday.", "Seventh-day Adventist Church", "H"]
["In one tradition this figure breaks an oath to follow without questioning while on a journey with Al-Khidr. In another tradition, this figure receives a vision of Adam and Eve's family in his namesake book in The Pearl of Great Price. This man ordered the slaughter of Midianites to retaliate against Balak, and he mounted a brass serpent on a pole to ward off snakebites after producing water from a rock and making manna rain from heaven. This husband of Tzipporah was raised by the Pharaoh's sister and announced the arrival of ten plagues with his brother Aaron. For 10 points, name this prophet who received the Torah on Mount Sinai and led the Israelites out of Egypt.", "Moses", "H"]
["This faith equally considers the exoteric, esoteric, and double hidden meanings within its scriptures which include the Letters of Wisdom. Like the Brotherhoold of Purity, this religion holds that God is everywhere, and many adherents of it deny God attributes through tanzi. Many members of this faith believe they are descended from the Prophet Jethro, and they are divided between the secular jihhal and the devout uqqal. This religion is based on the seven central principles established by Hamza, and it was founded by Hamza ibn Ali and Al-Hakim. For 10 points, name this Unitarian Ismaili religious community that accepts no converts and is symbolized by a five-color star.", "Druze", "H"]
["A man sitting on the ground in rags known as the Negus asked this person and his companions to visit him, and told him of a victory in a valley where thorny trees grow. A shipwreck off the shore of the Hejaz and a carpenter named Pacomius facilitated the reconstruction of a building for which this figure arbitrated the laying of the cornerstone. He earned the title of al-amin from the Qurayshites due to his marriage to an older merchant woman. In his farewell sermon he notes that no more prophets will come after him. His trip upon Al-Buraq during his Night Journey from Mecca to Jerusalem is recounted in the Quran. For 10 points, name this founder of Islam.", "Muhammad", "H"]
["Many celebrants of this festival welcome in seven exalted guests with the ushpizin prayer. Items important to this holiday include the arba minin that represent the eye, mouth, heart, and spine, and are carried around the synagogue in the morning as prescribed in Leviticus 23. Adherents beat the ground with five willow branches on the last day of this festival, the Hoshana Rabba during which households bless the etrog and lulav. It begins on the 15th of Tishrei, five days after Yom Kippur and is also called the Feast of the Tabernacles. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday, a pilgrimage festival that features the building of temporary booths or huts.", "Sukkot", "H"]
["In his first military action, this man liberated Jabesh Gilead from a man who threatened to gouge out every citizen's right eye. This man made a foolish vow that no one would eat before a military victory, which was broken when his son ate honey. He ordered Doeg the Edomite to massacre the priests of Nob. He employed such military leaders as Abner, who was murdered by his rival's aide Joab. This man fell on his own sword at the Battle of Mount Gilboa after his own (*) armor-bearer refused to slay him. This tall leader was first seen looking for his father's donkeys, a quest which led him to meet and be anointed by Samuel. This father of Jonathan married off his daughter to a shepherd boy who killed Goliath. For 10 points, name this first king of Israel who was succeeded by David.", "Saul", "H"]
["One master of this movement established the Hua Si in Linxia and created the menhuan, known for its worship at domed graves of members of this order, known as Dongbei. Ma Laichi was a member of this order, one suborder of which taught obedience to pir and included among its ranks a prominent figure interred at a tomb in Ajmer. One practice unique to this order involves attuning one's heartbeats to the names of God. The (*) Chisti order performs a ceremony that is seen as Bid'ah by opponents, the sama' which is performed as dhikr. Adherants to this order often visit religious sites and tombs, such as those of Hafiz and Rumi, but only the Mevlevi order practices the characteristic whirling. Dervishes are part of, for 10 points, what order that represents the mystical aspect of Islam?", "Poetry", "H"]
["This name identifies the author who described \"a lover and loved one moved in unison,\" in a poem about a spiritual surrender he experienced after leaving his \"house lay long in deep repose.\" An Early Church Father with this name was deposed at the Synod of the Oak and wrote the most celebrated Divine Liturgy of the Byzantine Rite. Another of them included discourses with \"I am\" sayings between seven signs, or miracles, culminating in the raising of Lazarus. That author of this name wrote the Biblical book with the fewest (*) verses, the second of his three epistles. Besides the naming the Carmelite author of The Dark Night of the Soul, this name is given to an author who described the Seven Churches of Asia and the Whore of Babylon. For 10 points, identify this name ascribed to an evangelist from Patmos who authored the Book of Revelation and the only canonical non-synoptic gospel.", "John", "H"]
["William Lane Craig is the foremost living proponent of a doctrine that modifies this one, support for which involves Matthew 11:23, which situates Capernaum as a citizen in Sodom. The view of infralapsarianism holds that this doctrine is logically compatible with Original Sin. This doctrine is the central concern of Molinism, a philosophy adopted by Arminius, who imagined the \"conditional\" form of this doctrine as opposed to the \"double\" form. A confrontation between Augustine and (*) Pelagius over this issue presaged by a millennium the debate about what accepting this doctrine means for free will. Max Weber posited that belief in this doctrine increased productivity even among the non-elect. For 10 points, identify this Calvinist doctrine which asserts that God has already determined who will go to Heaven.", "Predestination", "H"]
["One practice observed in some churches of this denomination involves reciting Psalms 103 and 104 while perambulating the boundaries of each parish. Its Bishop John Jewel wrote \"On the Peril of Idolatry\" in the second part of a major text used by this denomination, The Books of Homilies. Scripture, tradition, and reason form a \"three-legged stool\" hypothesized by a major figure in this non-Catholic denomination that upholds lex orandi, lex credendi. That man, Richard Hooker, hypothesized the doctrine of (*) latitudinarianism present in this denomination. Under leader Matthew Parker, the Thirty-Nine Articles of this denomination were drafted and would later be included in The Book of Common Prayer by Thomas Cranmer. For 10 points, identify this denomination that developed after Henry VIII split from the Catholic Church, led by the Archbishop of Canterbury.", "Church of England", "H"]
["The eradication of poverty and a \"reconstruction of America\" by this religious group were described in an essay by a convert, Frederick W. Evans. A mob was led against this group by the author of A Brief Statement of the Sufferings of Mary Dyer, written by the foremost opponent of this group. One sub-society of this religious group lived either in Colonie or Watervliet and styled themselves the Niskayuna Community. That society was co-led by Lucy Wright and Joseph Meacham, who took over after the death of James (*) Whittaker. This religious group is known for its production of quality furniture and for its songs, like \"Simple Gifts.\" This group ran orphanages to compensate for declining membership, since members are sworn to celibacy per Mother Ann Lee's teachings. For 10 points, name this American religious group that was named for their ecstatic prayer sessions.", "Shakers", "H"]
["This group hired official \"admonitors\" to warn leaders when they were acting imprudently. A forgery associated with this group was written by discharged member Jerome Zahorowski and was titled the Monita Secreta. The practice of discernment, or discretio, of good spirits from bad is the cornerstone of the Novitiate training period endured by members of this group. This order was associated with the (*) Ultramontanist campaigners for Papal Infallibility. Matteo Ricci was a member of this order known sometimes as God's Marines,\" which flourished briefly in Japan before Francis Xavier was forced to leave. Its founder, who lost both legs to an errant cannonball, authored the Spiritual Exercises. For 10 points, identify this Catholic order of priests and brothers founded by St. Ignatius of Loyola.", "Society of Jesus", "H"]
["The first of the tertons was one of these figures, for whom the honorific Rinpoche is reserved. Many of these figures agree that the highest of the nine yana teachings, the Dzogchen, is the most profound of all. These figures represent the \"root of blessing\" or grace and, along with the protector and yidam, comprise the Three Roots, which are the Inner form of the Three Jewels. Particularly high-ranking figures from this group are styled the Tulku and have the ability to choose the manner of their (*) reincarnation. These figures are the teachers in the Kagyu, Sakya, Gelug, and Nyingma traditions. The Chinese don't recognize the 21-year old Gedhun Choekyi Nyima as the current second highest-ranking of them, the Panchen kind. The highest ranking of these figures has been in exile in India since 1959. For 10 points, identify these priests of Tibetan Buddhism, led by the \"Dalai\" variety.", "Lamas", "M"]
["Martin Luther rejected the Roman Catholic interpretation of this event and instead asserted that it applied only to the spiritual realm of life. In it, the act of fasting is stated to be useless unless sincere. Some consider this event to be the antitype of Moses' proclamation of the Ten Commandments. It opens with the Beatitudes, and contains the Lord's Prayer, as well as instructions to \"resist not evil\" and \"turn the other cheek\". For 10 points, name this event described in chapters five to seven of the Gospel of Saint Matthew, an oration delivered on the namesake structure by Jesus Christ.", "Sermon on the Mount", "M"]
["Josephus identified her as Hur's wife, but other texts place her as his mother. She objected to her brother's marriage to a Cushite, causing God to turn her \"white as snow\". After the Israelites escaped from Egypt, she led the Hebrew women in a song of rejoicing, said to be the oldest part of the Bible. The daughter of Amram, she hid her brother in a river, and suggested their mother Yocheved to be his nurse when he was found in the bulrushes by the daughter of the Pharaoh. For 10 points, name this Jewish woman, whose namesake well accompanied the Israelites in the desert and who was the elder sister of Aaron and Moses.", "Miriam", "M"]
["Matthew, John 6, and First Corinthians 11 are cited as justification for it, and Pope Paul VI reiterated it in Mysterium fidei. The Lutheran doctrine of the Sacramental Union and the Anglican one of the Real Presence are both alternatives to it. It requires a distinction between accidents, which can be sensed, and substance, which cannot, causing Luther to call it \"an absurd and unheard-of juggling with words\". It was first declared at the Fourth Lateran Council and defined by the Council of Trent. For 10 points, name this Catholic doctrine in which the bread and wine of the Eucharist become the blood and body of Christ.", "Transubstantiation", "M"]
["In one legend from this religion, a figure pushes up the sky for 18,000 years; that deity is the creator god Pangu. Two figures from this religion repaired the sky after a water demon broke the pillar connecting heaven and earth, and that water spirit fought the fire god unsuccessfully for Heaven's throne. The \"Supreme\" and \"Grand Pure\" layers of heaven are guarded by two of the three Jewels of this religion, which considers Heaven's ruler to be the Jade Emperor, and a famous quote from this religion states that \"the Name that can be Named is not the Everlasting Name.\" For 10 points, name this religion, whose principal text, the Tao Te Ching, was written by Lao Tzu.", "Taoism", "M"]
["During the medieval period of Muslim rule, Jews were officially given the right to pray here as a result of a firman issued by Suleiman the Magnificent. Jewish tradition teaches that it was built by King David, and is a remnant of his First Temple, though historians suggest that it was an extension of the Second Temple, a construction presided over by Herod the Great in 19 BCE. One of the names of this monument comes from the cries of Jews who mourn at its base. For 10 points, name this structure in the old city of Jerusalem, which is known for the written prayers that many modern day Jews place between its bricks.", "Western Wall", "H"]
["This book's sixth chapter warns that \"your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost\" and that \"ye are not your own.\" The first chapter of this book dismisses Jews who \"require a sign\" and Greeks who \"seek after wisdom\" and identifies its co-author as \"Sosthenes our brother.\" This book's eleventh chapter is the basis for the oft-ignored rule that women must cover their heads while praying or proselytizing. Its passage \"O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?\" is often read at Easter, as this book contains the fullest enunciation of the doctrine of the \"Resurrection of the Dead.\" This book declares that \"when I became a man, I put away childish things\" before noting that \"we see through a glass, darkly.\" The thirteenth chapter of this book also ends a digression on the nature of love by stating that there is \"faith, hope and love. But the greatest of these is love.\" For 10 points, name this Pauline epistle addressed to a Greek city.", "First Epistle to the Corinthians", "H"]
["This figure tells one of his relations \"if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.\" After the Battle of the Vale of Siddim, he chases down and defeats the forces of four kings with just 318 men, causing Melchizedek to gift him with bread and wine. He is given a thousand pieces of silver and referred to as a \"covering of the eyes\" by Abimelech of Gerar, and has a similar encounter with the Pharaoh after telling his wife to pretend to be his sister. After talking God down from fifty, he fails to find ten good men in Sodom and Gomorrah, leading the wife of his nephew Lot to be turned into a pillar of salt. With Hagar he is the father of Ishmael and with his wife Sarah he is the father of Isaac, whom he nearly sacrifices. For 10 points, name this Old Testament patriarch.", "Abraham", "H"]
["A piece of cloth associated with one saint of this name was used to calm a storm, and in another story, he anonymously guided two Franciscan nuns on a pilgrimage. That saint is sometimes known as the \"Hammer of the Heretics\" and is usually depicted holding the infant Jesus and a book, which represents the time a novice ran off with his psalter. Another saint of this name was the subject of a popular biography by Athanasius, which describes his encounter with a plate of silver and with demons in the form of a centaur and satyr. One saint of this name is asked to \"turn around, something's lost and must be found!\" as he's the the Paduan patron saint of lost things, and the other is commonly depicted wandering through the desert, being tempted, and pioneering monasticism. For 10 points, give the name shared by these saints.", "Saint Anthony", "H"]
["The demoness Surpanakha had her nose and ears cut off as punishment for attacking this figure. This woman raised the twins Lava and Kusha alone after gossip among the citizens of Ayodhya drove her husband to cast her out. That husband won the right to marry her after he was the only man to successfully lift Shiva's bow. This princess of Mithila was the adopted daughter of Janaka, who found her in a furrow while plowing a field. She entered a burning pyre to prove her purity, after she voluntarily accompanied her husband and Lakshmana in a fourteen year exile. She once asked her husband to catch a golden deer which turned out to be Maricha in disguise. Subsequently, Hanuman jumped across the ocean to find her, and a bridge to Lanka was built to rescue, for 10 points, which figure kidnapped by Ravana, the wife of Rama.", "Sita", "H"]
["According to one story, the goat or antelope headed deity Harinaigameshin descended from heaven to remove the embryo of this figure from Devananda. According to another story, he was given his name after an angelic figure turned into a monster while he was riding on its back. This figure's experiences with snakes include being tested by Sangama in the form of one and allowing the poisonous cobra Chandakaushik to bite him. His mother Queen Trishala had a series of fourteen exotic dreams before his birth. This figure was given the title Jina, or Conqueror, after creating the fifth and final of the five vows. His life is discussed in depth in the Kalpasutra, and his teachings include the twelve angas, which are found in his Agamas. This man's marriage to Princess Yasoda is disputed by the Digambaras, and he invented ahimsa. For 10 points, name this twenty fourth and final Tirthankar of Jainism.", "Mahavira", "H"]
["This work argues that, since \"that which man excludes from heaven he excludes from his true nature\" and \"in heaven there is no marriage,\" celibacy is inherent to the nature of faith. The same section in which that argument appears, \"Celibacy and Monachism,\" also discusses how \"The idea of man as a species, and with it the significance of the life of the species, of humanity as a whole, vanished.\" Its second chapter, which discusses \"God as a Being of the Understanding,\" proclaims that \"Religion is the disuniting of man from himself\" and elaborates on how man and God are opposites. Its second section contains chapters on contradictions in the existence, revelation, and nature of God. Forming the basis for many of Karl Marx's views on religion, for 10 points, name this work of Ludwig Feuerbach that outlined his opinion of a certain faith founded by Jesus.", "The Essence of Christianity", "H"]
["A song sung at the beginning of this observance refers to it as a queen or bride and is called the Lekhah Dodi. Common meals eaten on this day include a stew called Cholent which is often eaten as the Seudah Shlishit or \"third meal.\" It ends with a breaking ceremony called Havdalah which occurs after three stars are visible in the night sky. The scriptural justification for this observance comes from Exodus 20:11 and Deuteronomy 5:15, which provide its two commandments of Zakhor and Shamor, or \"to remember\" and \"to observe.\" Rabbinical debate over the meaning of Melachah primarily applies to this day, as it suggests avoiding the thirty-nine melakhot, which include writing two or more letters, tearing for the purpose of sewing, and igniting a fire. This observance begins on Fridays at sundown and concludes at sundown on Saturdays. For 10 points, name this Jewish day of rest.", "Shabbat", "H"]
["According to the hadith that proscribes stoning adulterers in Islam, the original page of the Qur'an containing that punishment was eaten by one of these animals. Eleven curtains made from these animals were used in constructing the tabernacle. The angel Gabriel helps Daniel interpret a dream in which a ram of two horns is smashed by a rough one of these with one horn, usually thought to represent Alexander the Great. Jacob wears a hairy cloak in order to feed Isaac some stew made from two of these animals. Joseph's coat was dipped in the blood of one of these animals to trick Jacob. According to a parable found in Matthew, sheep go to heaven and these animals go to hell. Exodus proscribes that Aaron will draw lots to sacrifice one of these to god and drive one out into the wilderness for Azazel. For 10 points, name these animals whose \"scape\" varieties carry away the sins of others.", "Goat", "H"]
["The leader of this religion is chosen by a vote narrowing the field to three candidates, whose names are written on paper and picked randomly by a child. Its calendar is divided into three seasons, including sowing and harvest seasons, and thirteen months, the holiest of which is Kiahk. Devout adherents of this religion partake in an astounding 210 days of fasting per year. One important ritual in this religion involves anointing infants with the Oil of Myron and having the sign of the cross made thirty six times over them. The current leader of this faith is Shenouda III, who maintains a form of the miaphytism that led to the formation of this religion in 451 after the Council of Chalcedon. Many of this faith's churches contain iconostasis, most of which depict its earliest founder St. Mark the Evangelist. For 10 points, name this Orthodox Church based in Egypt.", "Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria", "H"]
["This book contrasts the radiating, hovering, Jesus with the suffering disciples below in Raphael's Transfiguration as an example of \"transforming an illusion into an illusion.\" It tells the story of King Midas, who chased a satyr for many years only to be greeted by derision after asking it the meaning of life. This work defines the \"naive artist\" as one who is interested only in the beauty of a work. Fourteen years after its publication, the author of this work prefaced its twenty five chapters with \"An Attempt at Self-Criticism.\" This work also contains a \"Preface to Richard Wagner,\" as it holds that the emerging German art is the last bastion of true culture. It holds that the elimination of music was one of the many crimes committed by Euripides, whose intellectualism disturbed the balance between the Apollonian and Dionysian. For 10 points, name this first work of Friedrich Nietzsche.", "The Birth of Tragedy", "H"]
["One offshoot of this denomination known as \"The Dawn\" evangelized through a radio question and answer program called Frank and Ernest. This sect rented eighty movie theaters in 1914 to play an eight hour long Photo-Drama of Creation all around the United States. Many of the modern ideas of this denomination, including the belief that Jesus was killed on a stake instead of a cross, were shaped by \"Judge\" Rutherford. This faith has its origins in the Adventist beliefs of Charles Taze Russell, whose work led to predictions of the end of \"the time of the gentiles\" in 1914, 1925, and 1975, and claimed that 144,000 people would be lifted up to heaven. This religion prohibits saluting a flag or receiving or giving blood transfusion and spreads its beliefs through publications like Awake! and The Watchtower. For 10 points, name this Christian denomination whose practitioners are known for knocking on doors and giving out literature.", "Jehovah's Witnesses", "H"]
["These places are always marked by a triangular orange flag called the nishan which bears an emblem that resembles a khanda. They also generally include a community kitchen called a langar in which all who are hungry sit in a line called a pangat and are served. Most of them include a box called a golak, which sits in the Darbar Hall before an exquisite cloth canopy called a chanai and a gilded gilded platform called the Palki. At these locations, it is considered a high honor to complete a ritual involving waving a fan called a Chaur. They also contain a small bed called a Manji on which rests a book which is covered by an intricate square piece of cloth called a rumalla. That book is afforded these luxuries because it is the SGGS, also known as the living guru or the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name these Sikh holy buildings.", "Gurdwara", "H"]
["Practitioners of this religion believe that the only two unforgivable sins are murder and blasphemy. They also believe in the existence of the Telestial, Terrestrial, and Celestial Kingdoms, three levels of heavens where all except the \"sons of perdition\" go after death. All boys who practice this religion enter the Aaronic priesthood at the age of twelve by becoming deacons, and the other branch of its priesthood has ranks called elder, seventy, and high priest and is termed the \"Melchizedek\" order. One holy book of this religion was written in (*) \"reformed Egyptian\" and was affirmed by the Testimonies of the Three Witnesses and the Eight Witnesses, who confirmed that the angel Moroni had revealed the location of golden plates to Joseph Smith. For 10 points, name this religion of Brigham Young.", "Mormonism", "H"]
["One text related to this religion references the actions of the priest Lohan, who received the priest Kih-ho and had earlier endured the actions of a ruler who was hostile to it. That text contains an ode that proclaims that \"The sovereign has the power to act\" while the ministers only have the power to record. It frequently mentions \"Illustrious churches\" and opens by urging the reader to \"Behold the unchangingly true and invisible.\" Also referencing how the missionary Alopen spread this doctrine to the Taizong Emperor, that text is this doctrine's namesake (*) stele. Cyril of Alexandria wrote heavily against this heresy that argued against the use of the title \"Theotokos\" to refer to the Virgin Mary and was condemned at the First Council of Ephesus. For 10 points, name this early Christian heresy.", "Nestorianism", "H"]
["One of these reminds readers of the fate of the \"Owners of the Elephant.\" Another of these tells of two angels who visit Babylon but warn the people there not to repeat their magic acts. That one also contains a passage about a throne extending over heaven and earth and a story in which a murder victim is brought back to life by the body of a yellow (*) cow. All but one of these is preceded by the basmalah and they are often divided into thirty juz for easy study. The first of these is called \"the Opening\" and the second and longest contains the \"Throne ayah\" and is called \"the Cow.\" For 10 points, name these passages which were divided into Meccan and Medinan classifications after being revealed to Muhammad, the chapters of the Koran.", "Surah", "H"]
["Practitioners of this faith have funerals and other public functions in large public amphitheaters called mawqaf. Some members of this sect make an annual pilgrimage to the tomb where Jethro, the father of Moses, is believed to lie. Most practitioners of this faith are known as the juhhal, or uninitiated, and only a select few become uqqal, and get full access to its teachings and rituals. This sect's holiest writings are a series of five letters known as the \"Epistles of Wisdom.\" It was founded by (*) Hamzah ibn Ali, who disappeared after declaring that God's representation on earth was the sixth Fatamid Caliph al-Hakim, who also disappeared. Members of this branch of Isma?ilism can deny their religion in a rite called taqiyah. For 10 points, name this secretive Middle Eastern religion.", "Druze", "H"]
["This man is the son of Haran, and he became the progenitor of two great tribes after fathering Moab and Ammon. After their flocks become too large to cohabitate, this man's uncle gives him the choice of which land to take. He shelters two angels in his house, even offering his two virgin daughters to the angry mob which has gathered outside. Those daughters make him extremely (*) drunk and seduce him in a cave without his knowledge on two consecutive nights. After God fails to find ten righteous men in his city, this man barely escapes the fire and brimstone destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, while his wife ignores God's instructions to not look backward and is turned into salt. For 10 points, name this nephew of Abraham.", "Lot", "H"]
["In Islamic tradition, this figure is said to have misplaced a fish while on a journey to find Khidr. In another tradition, he trapped five kings in a cave before destroying their armies and impaling them. In the book named for him, Achan is discovered to have stolen loot through a casting of lots. Despite being the only ones of twelve spies to give good reports, he and Caleb were nearly stoned. Spies he sent were aided by the prostitute (*) Rahab. He succeeded in asking God to stop the sun and the moon to defeat an alliance of Amorites. The waters of the Jordan River parted for this man, who ordered his soldiers to march around the city of Jericho seven times blowing on trumpets. For 10 points, name this successor of Moses whose namesake book is the first after the Torah.", "Joshua", "H"]
["Noted participants in this event included the liaison to Communist countries, Franz Konig, and the liberal Hans Kung. American opponents of this event rallied behind John Joseph Krol, while its leading dissenters worldwide organized as the International Group of Fathers and founded movements such as sedevacantism under leaders including Marcel Lefebvre and Hutton Gibson. Lesser-known documents produced at this event include a \"decree on the means of social communication;\" it also issued decrees such as Dignitatis humanae, on religious (*) freedom, and Nostra Aetate, which revoked the doctrine of collective Jewish guilt. Several \"dogmatic constitutions\" defining modern Catholicism also appeared at, for 10 points, what 1962 to 1965 summit convened by John XIII at the Papal home city?", "Second Vatican Council", "H"]
["The shehecheyanu prayer is said after eating fruit dipped in honey after this observance. This holiday begins of the ten days of awe, and it is the only Jewish holiday celebrated over multiple days. Celebration of this holiday sometime includes the practice of tashlikh, or throwing food into running water, and it is ten days before (*) Yom Kippur. After each group of three prayers on this holiday, the shofar is blown as an indication of the spiritual awakening Moses received on Sinai. This holiday is sometimes known as the Day of Remembrance because practitioners are instructed to remember the creation. It is also called the Day of Judgment and occurs on the first day of Tishri, the first month of the Jewish calendar. For 10 points, name this Jewish New Year holiday.", "Rosh Hashanah", "H"]
["In one story, this figure tells a young man to fill one jar with stones and another with butter and to smash them over a river. In another story, he tells the bandit Angulimal to cut off the branch of a tree and put it back again. In another instance, he tells a farmer that all humans have eighty-three problems but that he can only help with the eighty-fourth. He was conceived when his mother Queen (*) Maha Maya dreamed about a six tusked white elephant, and the monk Asita predicted he would be a great king or a religious leader. He married Yasodhara before escaping his father's palace and seeing a diseased man, a corpse, and a monk. He gave the Fire Sermon and preached the four noble truths. For 10 points, name this founder of an eastern religion.", "Gautama Buddha", "H"]
["The prediction about events happening in \"time, times and half a time\" in this book's eighth chapter is one of the cornerstones of the 1260-day Biblical prophecy. The Prayer of Azaria is usually excluded from this book, which always includes one character's vision of a war between the king of the north and the king of the south. Two old men are put to death after lecherously watching (*) Susana bathe in her garden in a story included in the Catholic version of this book. Some characters in this book are perfectly healthy after eating only vegetables, and those characters are thrown into a furnace after refusing to bow to a golden statue. The title character of this book interprets a dream about a giant idol made of four metals and reads the handwriting on the wall at Belshazzar's Feast. For 10 points, name this book about a prophet thrown into a lion's den.", "Book of Daniel", "M"]
["The Zohar cites Job 1:6 and Job 2:1 to establish a two-day framework for celebration of this holiday. The Talmud states that the prediction of one's losses during the next year occurs on this holiday, whose first afternoon includes the tashlikh, or recitation of prayer near flowing water. The \"days of awe\" precede this holiday, which is followed by the fast day of Gedalia. If this holiday lies on the Shabbat, the Shofar is not played, but gefilte fish, apples, and honey are served regardless. Occurring during Tishrei, the seventh month of the Jewish calendar, for 10 points, name this Jewish celebration of the New Year.", "Rosh Hashanah", "M"]
["One branch of this religion is derided as the \"farmer\" variety and places emphasis on the poem \"The Harmony of Difference and Sameness.\" In addition to the Soto sect, this religion's sect includes one which focuses on the makyo hallucinations experienced prior to kensho, which might be brought about with excerpts from the Blue Cliff Record. This religion was brought to China by Bodhidharma, focuses on inquiry into paradoxical koans, and teaches the use of personal experience to bring about satori, or enlightenment. For 10 points, name this kind of Buddhism popular in Japan.", "Zen", "M"]
["According to religious literature, the official service during this holiday was prefaced by a seven-day sequestering in the Parhedrin Chamber. In orthodox circles, this holiday still includes the removal of the incense from the Holy of Holies and the pronunciation of the Tetragrammaton. The Al Cheit, Ashamnu, and closing Ne'ilah prayers are unique to this holiday, which sees the recitation of the Kol Nidre prayer on its eve, the reading of the Book of Jonah, and Vidui, or the public confession of sins. Occurring eight days after Rosh Hashanah, for 10 points, name this Jewish Day of Atonement.", "Yom Kippur", "M"]
["The Al ha-Nissim addition is made to the hoda'ah benediction in the prayer service for this holiday, which includes the reading of Zechariah 2:14-4:7. The final moments of this holiday include the reading of the verse \"This was the dedication of the altar\" on its final day, which is known as Zot. The medieval German hymn Ma'oz Tzur is sung during this holiday, which sees the wide consumption of latkes. This holiday was borne from a struggle against Antiochus and included an incident in which a container of oil kept a menorah burning for eight days. Gelt is distributed and dreidel is played on, for 10 points, what winter Jewish holiday?", "Hanukkah", "M"]
["One incident related in this book is the death of Nadav and Avihu for filling their censures with \"strange fire.\" This book specifically prohibits sacrificing children to Moloch and distinguishes between \"trespass-offerings,\" \"sin-offerings,\" and \"burnt-offerings.\" Chapters 13 and 14 of this book discuss the affliction of tzaraath, and chapter 23 of this book specifies the allowed days for work on feasts and other holidays. Sections of this book discuss Yom Kippur and sexual misconduct, which includes a prohibition of bestiality and homosexual relations. Divided into a Priestly Code and Holiness Code, for 10 points, name this third book of the Torah.", "Book of Leviticus", "M"]
["In the book named for this figure, Gabriel announces that four sovereigns of a certain empire would appear prior to Alexander the Great. This figure makes a dragon explode by feeding it barley cakes after scattering ashes to prove that 70 priests and their families ate the offerings allotted for Bel. This figure compares the destruction of a clay and iron statue by a rock to the inevitable fall of empires. This figure also explains the writing of the wall at Belshazzar's feast and survives a stay in the den of lions. For 10 points, name this Old Testament figure who divined some dreams.", "Daniel", "M"]
["One episode in this book is a mass circumcision at Gibeath-Haaraloth, which becomes known as the \"hill of foreskins.\" One army in this book suffers a defeat at the city of Ai, which leads to the stoning of Achan for his covetousness. In this book, a coalition led by Adoni-Zedek later attacks Gibeon, and in one of the first conquests in this book, the harlot Rahab assists the Israelite army by harboring spies sent to her city. That act allowed the title character's army to march around Jericho and bring down its walls on the seventh day. For 10 points, identify this book of the Old Testament that details the Israelite conquest of Canaan following the death of Moses.", "Book of Joshua", "M"]
["According to scripture, the rituals of this observance chain up the demons of hell and require niyyah, or intention. The extra Tarawih prayers are performed during the nights of this holiday, which is bounded by the Suhoor and the iftar. The Laylat al-Qadr, or Night of Power, occurred during the final ten days of this holiday, whose end is traditionally celebrated just prior to the month of Shawwal with the Eid al-Fitr meal. Mandated by the pillar of Sawm, for 10 points, name this holiday of the ninth month of the Islamic calendar, which involves day-long fasting.", "Ramadan", "M"]
["Retrospection and Introspection,", "Christian Science", "M"]
["\"Desirable Dominion\" and \"Good Purpose\" are names of two divinities in this religion, whose adherents cross the Chinvat bridge after death. Members of one sect of this religion bury themselves and are eaten as carrion in \"towers of silence,\" and practitioners of this religion pray in fire temples and revere the Amesha Spentas. The holy book of this religion includes the Vendidad, Yashts, and Yasna, and details the conflict between Ahriman and good. For 10 points, name this religion whose holy book is the Avesta and whose primary god is Ahura Mazda, a religion from Iran.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["The jurist Bernardo di Quintavalle was the first to accompany this man, who impressed Melek el-Kamel by triumphing over the sultan's Muslim scholars in a trial by fire. This man was able to pacify the Wolf of Gubbio, and suffered a major illness in between campaigns set at Puglia and Perugia. Tommaso de Celano wrote the biography of this figure, who was gifted the mountain La Verna and was the subject of several Fioretti. This saint created an order containing the Poor Clares after he received the stigmata during a vision about the Feast of the Cross. For 10 points, name this patron saint of animals, an Italian saint from Assisi.", "Francis of Assisi", "H"]
["This person is the second namesake of a condition that, when combined with the Schrodinger equation in a periodic potential, results in Bloch's theorem. That condition states that the wavefunction must be unchanged by translation by a lattice translation vector. This thinker determined that the ratio between mean and roughness velocities in a boundary layer flow is equal to about 0.41. In addition to the aforementioned constant and boundary condition also named for Born, this scientist discovered a quasi-periodic shedding pattern caused by locally turbulent separated flow past blunt bodies. This physicist's aforementioned namesake streets of vortices are shed by fast flows past cylinders. For 10 points, name this physicist whose namesake line marks the edge of the Earth's atmosphere, a Hungarian-American.", "Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n", "H"]
["In one section the author compares a belief in corporeality with idolatry, while another discusses God's multiple intelligences. Its last chapter focuses on wisdom and the perfectibility of man, and it notes that the fourth and final kind of perfection can only be achieved through faith. Interspersed throughout the text are references to the mystical Merkabha section of the book of Ezekiel. Its introductory sections include \"Directions for the study of this work\" and \"On Method,\" the latter of which addresses the inconsistencies commonly found in the Mishnah. Written in the form of a letter to the author's student, it attempted to allay Joseph ben Judah's religious confusion. For 10 points, identify this 1190 treatise written in Arabic, an attempt to reconcile Aristotle with Judaism, by Maimonides.", "The Guide for the Perplexed", "H"]
["Clorinda Minor took a group of them to Jerusalem, while Joshua Vaughn Himes helped to popularize their beliefs in publications including The Voice of the West and Signs of the Times.Their beliefs originated with the founder's experience of a miracle at the Battle of Plattsburg and a series of sixteen articles in the Vermont Telegraph, where its founder discussed his rooted interpretation of prophecy by citing such books as Numbers 14:34. Featuring such leaders as Joseph Bates and Ellen White, they met at Albany after incorrectly predicting that, according to Daniel 8:14, a new millennium would begin on October 22, 1844, an event that never happened and has subsequently been called \"The Great Disappointment.\" For 10 points, identify this religious denomination founded by William Miller that believes in the imminent second coming of Christ on a certain day of the week.", "Seventh-day Adventist Church", "H"]
["They touch upon the hospitality of Rahab and discuss the impossibility of serving both God and Mammon. One of them includes a discussion of the Phoenix myth before it segues into the omniscience of God and the hope of Resurrection. That discussion is preceded by a reference to Job and the example of a vast sea being withheld by God's Will. Although Johann Hug argued that the strident tone of the last four chapters in these works marks that section as the work of another author, that section's defense of the author's life as an apostle, which included trips to Salonnica with Silas, is biographically accurate. The longer one is best known for Chapter 49's statement that there is \"nothing base or arrogant\" in love, and that love \"bears all things,\" and was probably written while the author was in Ephesus in AD 56. For ten points identify this pair of Epistles written by Paul to a church in the namesake Greek city.", "Epistles to the Corinthians", "H"]
["It includes such chapters as \"Of the Diversity of Affections\" and \"Against the Enticings or Provokings unto Avarice.\" One of its most notable sections asks why one should speak to God through a priest, when one can speak to God directly. It avoids any discussion of the sacraments and argues that scripture should be made freely available to all people. Its primary argument is that true Christianity is an inner, personal practice that is based on going back to the Bible and leaving aside rituals and ceremony. First translated into English by one of the author's students, William Tyndale, its composition and title were inspired by a meeting with an uneducated warrior. For 10 points, identify this 1503 work describing the nature of piety and true religion to a layman, written by Erasmus.", "Handbook of a Christian Knight", "H"]
["He reflected on the fall of the \"New Jerusalem\" in the city of Munster in his Against the Blasphemy of Jan van Leyden, while the influential chapters \"The Time of Grace\" and \"The True Ministers\" can be found in his Foundation Book, which led to his persecution. Some sixty years after his death in 1561, his followers would release the Dordrecht Confession of Faith in an attempt to distinguish their beliefs from that of other Anabaptist groups, such as those who would splinter off under the leadership of Jakob Amman. For 10 points, identify this Dutch religious reformer, who gave his name to a church whose largest denomination is now in the U.S. and whose members refuse to bear arms and are known for their simple dress.", "Menno Simons", "H"]
["One figure worshiped in this religion causes people to shout \"My testicles are cold\" in order to demand a strong drink. This religion refers to historical attempts to destroy it as \"deshoukaj.\" Priests in this religion use a sacred rattle called an ason, and people become part of this religion through kanzo initiation. Most adherents of this religion practice its Rada variety, which believes in kind, healing deities, unlike its Petro variety. Its members believe that when people die, their surviving family members keep their immortal spirits in clay jars called govi. Its priests are known as houngan, and its members worship a single God, Bondye. It believes in spirits that speak through believers by \"mounting\" them, such as Erzulie, Agwe, Baron Samedi, and Legba. Worship of loas is central to, for 10 points, what official religion of Haiti?", "Voodoo", "H"]
["They eventually split into two factions, primarily over the question of communal land ownership. One of those factions, the Sons of Freedom, would lead a series of nudist strikes.The major element in their life was \"the gathering,\" at which large passages of the Book of Life would be read, and their leaders included a man named Silva and Peter Verigin who commanded a namesake rebellion. It was their refusal to be conscripted that led to their exile from the land they'd been given by Alexander I around the Sea of Azov. Originally called \"Christians of the Universal Brotherhood,\" after they burned their weapons in an 1895 protest, their struggle and eventual emigration to Canada was supported by Leo Tolstoy. For 10 points, identify this Russian religious sect whose supposedly heretical beliefs led to them being given a name that translates as \"Spirit Wrestlers.\"", "Resurrection (novel)", "H"]
["This figure was said to have lived 137 years and once quelled a storm by jumping directly into the raging ocean. In order to win a war, he was instructed to take earth from the shrine of the heavenly mountain and create heavenly platters.During a quest to bring peace to the land, this mythological figure was guided by a three legged, golden crow sent from the celestial realm.Although the bear god bewitched him for a time, he eventually succeeded in defeating the eighty bandits of Mount Kunimi and establishing his palace at Kashiha-hara.Also known as Toyo-Mike-Nu, according to the Nihongi he was the son of the sea goddess, Jewel Good Princess, and the grandson of Ninigi. But it was another relative, Amaterasu, who gave him a magic sword.For 10 points, identify this legendary general and first emperor of Japan.", "Emperor Jimmu", "H"]
["Former languages used by this group of people included Kayla and Qwara, and they marked their obligations on a calendar known as the Abu Shaker. They have a unique holiday known as Sigd, and they are led in prayers by elders of the community named Kessim. Once concentrated around Lake Tana, and led by such men as Radi, their numbers dwindled during European colonization. Their religious identity was not legally recognized until 1975, which occurred a decade before 10,000 of them were airlifted to safety during Operation Moses and allowed to stay under the law of return. Popularly named for a word meaning \"Exiles\" in Amharic, for 10 points, identify this religious group who call themselves Beta Israel and hail from a particular African nation.", "Beta Israel", "H"]
["According to one account, the men involved in this incident ate food from the same dish as the dogs, who then refused to eat from that dish. The family of one of the men involved was said to be cursed to always have either too much or too little water, and a legend about another of the men involved claims that he founded the McMahon family in Ireland. Edward Grim was wounded during this incident. Its target had opposed the marriage of the Count of Poitou to Isabel de Warenne, which may have led Richard Brito to participate in it. After learning that the Scottish king favored hanging them, the perpetrators took shelter at Knaresborough before surrendering and performing penance at Black Mountain. This event was inspired by an off-the-cuff remark asking for \"someone to rid me of this pesky priest,\" which Brito, William de Tracy, Hugh de Moreville, and Reginald Fitzurse took seriously. For 10 points, name this event in which four Norman knights supposed that Henry II wanted a certain Archbishop of Canterbury dead.", "Lapford", "H"]
["Samuel Murray has hypothesized that the first-discovered member of this class of molecules was actually a fragment of spp-24 that binds to them. Mesenchymal cells of the septum transversum use one of these molecules as a signal to induce albumin expression in the endoderm of the liver. Interaction between type I and type II receptors of this class of molecules can lead to the initiation of transcription of R-Smads, and juvenile polyposis can be mimicked through overexpression of noggin, an inhibitor of them. They were first discovered by Marshall Urist, and a gradient in them regulates the expression of Msx, a protein necessary for the specification of the neural crest. For 10 points, name this class of proteins named for their ability to induce formation of new bone tissue.", "Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena", "H"]
["**This figure's brother was born after lightning struck a broken egg, and his own birth resulted in the Gods cowering and asking him to shrink. Sometimes considered the descendent of Cyena and Cyene, during the Mahabarata, Dronacharya uses a battle formation named for this figure. This ruler of the Suparnas had a sister named Sumati, and this figure's children include Sampati and a friend of Rama who attempted to stop Ravana's kidnapping of Sita, Jatayu. Indra stole a container of amrita during his quest to free his mother Vinata from Kadru. FTP, name this king of the birds and eternal enemy of the snakelike Nagas, the mount of Vishnu.", "Garuda", "H"]
["**The hakhel ceremony of hearing the king of Israel read the Torah on the Chol Ha Moed of this holiday has been revived and led by the president of Israel in recent years. A water blessing called the Nisoch Hamayim that was performed to bless the temples in Jerusalem is also revived with a celebration called the Simchat Beit Hashoevah. On this holiday's final day, the Hoshana Raba, observers of this holiday circle the synagogue seven times with a lulav and etrog, and a followers strike the ground with a bundle of five aravah willow branches. S'chach designates the material that can be used for the roof of this holiday's namesake structures, and it is immediately followed by Shemini Atzeret and Simchat Torah. For 10 points, what is this Jewish holiday also known as the Feast of the Tabernacles?", "Sukkot", "H"]
["**Upon his death, his son Eleazar succeeded him, and during a battle with Amalek, Hur and this man fulfilled the command that an object \"of God might be lifted up.\" A possession of this man was the only one to bear almonds when left alone in the tabernacle, and that object was later kept in the Holy of Holies, which could only be entered by this man on Yom Kippur. Descended from Amram and Jochebad, the marriage of his younger brother to a foreigner was opposed by this man and his sister Miriam, and he supervised the creation of the Golden Calf while that brother was away. For 10 points, identify this Biblical figure, the high priest of the First Temple, who often spoke on behalf of his brother, Moses.", "Aaron", "H"]
["**Some traces of it remain today in the Ultrajectine tradition and it was believed to be influenced by elements of Baianism. On Frequent Communion propounded its belief in a long and arduous preparation for the Sacraments and its followers adhered to a doctrine of predestination. Its most important work contained three sections, On Pelagianism, On Original Sin and On Divine Grace and was condemned in the bull Cum Occassione. An important early leader of it was Jean du Vergier de Hauranne, who was also known as the Abbey of Saint-Cyran. The Peace of Clement IX helped to subdue controversy over it, but tensions were renewed after the Case of Conscience of 1701. For ten points identify this popular heresy in 18th century France that was championed by Blaise Pascal and named after a Bishop of Ypres.", "Jansenism", "H"]
["**In an apocryphal text describing his \"Ascension\", this figure is accused by the Samaritan Balkira and sawn in half upon orders from Manasseh. He is described as the son of a woman known only as \"the prophetess\", and first came to prominence as an advisor to king's Jotham and Ahaz. His book's earlier chapters includes the anti-war passage \"They will beat their swords into plowshares\". Also described in his namesake book is King Hezekiah's alliance with Egypt, prompting the Assyrian siege of Jerusalem under King Sennacherib, and near the end his book includes a series of famous Messianic prophecies known as the songs of the \"Suffering Servant\". For 10 points, name this namesake of the longest prophetic book of Old Testament.", "Isaiah", "H"]
["A scholar of this faith named F.E. Mayer formulated the theory that American religions are classified by their \"formal\" and \"material\" principles. One sect of this faith published the text \"This We Believe,\" citing First Timothy in claiming that no woman may hold a church office in which she has authority over a man. Its foundational texts are collected in the Book of Concord, and those texts include an Apology for its central creed as well as its founder's Small and Large Catechisms. Its doctrine of \"salvation by faith alone\" is expounded in its seminal text, written by Phillip Melanchthon, the Augsburg Confession. For 10 points, name this religion that has Wisconsin and Missouri Synods as well as the more moderate ELCA faction, founded by a German monk who defaced a Wittenberg cathedral with his 95 Theses.", "Lutheranism", "H"]
["The Banno Bir is an unauthorized version of this text, and a noted copy of it was lost during the 1762 \"Second Holocaust.\" The Dasam is a companion piece to this scripture, parts of which laud Kabir and other sections of which were written by Tegh Bahadur. Other sections are arranged according to their raga, and portions of this text include the Japji, or \"Recital\" and the opening Mul Mantra, which declares truth as the quintessential property of the Deity. Found in all gurdwaras, where it is ritually wrapped every night, it carries the authority of the head of the religion that reveres it. First compiled by Arjun, for 10 points, name this scripture that includes the writings of Guru Nanak, the holy book of the Sikhs.", "Guru Granth Sahib", "M"]
["This religion's ceremonies include the royal rite of the sun, or rada rite, and initiation ceremonies in which novices progress from bosal to kanzo. Figures of worship in this religion include a female figure depicted with three wedding rings and a psychopomp who also governs eroticism. Practitioners believe that the cosmos is populated by zanj and anvizib, among other spirits, and that the soul is composed of gros and ti bon anges. In addition to Erzulie and Ghede, worshippers may call on the guardian of cross-roads, Legba. Evil magicians known as bokor, priests known as houngans, and priestesses known as mambos all appear in, for ten points, what religion whose adherents call upon loas?", "Voodoo", "M"]
["One legend obout this holiday states that the village boys combined their forces and chased away the ogress Dhurundi, which is memorialized on this day, while another ogress associated with this holiday is Pootana, who almost killed Kirshna. In some parts of India, participants in this festival make sure to thank Kamakaya for using his arrows to evoke Shiva's interest in worldly matters. Several days before this holiday is celebrated, participants light a fire called at the cross-roads of the village. During the festival itself, it's traditional to burn an effigy of the sister of King Hiranyakashyap, for whom this holiday is named. The most recognizable ritual from this holiday comes from the celebration with the puja. For ten points, identify this Hindu festival of colors in which participants paint themselves.", "Holi", "M"]
["This ideology led to the development of venalon, which was related to the development of the Taean work system, which this ideology also promoted. Under this system , the year 1 is set at 1912 CE. This ideology was first promulgated in a speech given to leadership which emphasized dispensing with \"Dogmatism and Formalism,\" and this ideology gave rise to the industrial Chollima movement, in which workers were so motivated that they increased production dramatically. This ideology advocates personal chajusong, or absolute independence, and absolute submission to the needs of the party. For ten points, identify this official state religion of North Korea, which preaches ultimate self-reliance and veneration of Kim Il Sung and his son.", "Juche", "M"]
["A corpse belonging to one of these is cut into twelve pieces by a Levite living in Ephraim after being raped by a gang of thugs. That one is appears in Judges 19, and consequently, the fifteenth of Av commemorates the readmission of the Tribe of Benjamin after that same incident, referring to one \"at Gibea.\" Jacob had one of these named Bilhah and one named Zilpah, while King Solomon notably had three hundred, and they are distinguished because they do not receive a ketubah. Islam limits the number of these to the number of orphans one may support, while a famous one of these gave birth to the husband of Aisha and Fatima. For 10 points, identify this position occupied by Ishmael's mother Hagar, because she lived with Abraham though he was married to Sarah.", "Concubinage", "M"]
["Shoshanas Yaakov and Kacha yay'ase are sometimes sung on this holiday. Seeds and nuts are sometimes but not always eaten on this holiday, because traditionally one person who this holiday celebrates had no access to kosher food. Participants in this holiday who have obtained bar mitzvah must send mishloach manot. When this holiday falls on a Friday, it is given the designation HaMeshulash, which means that it is celebrated in three parts, and people sometimes celebrate this holiday with a gragger, or noisemaker. Celebrated on the fourteenth of Adar, this holiday often features the cooking of hamentaschen, which are named for the evil ruler that oppressed the Hebrew. For ten points, identify this holiday on which the book of Esther is read, which commemorates the deliverance of the Jews.", "Purim", "M"]
["One pope of this name excommunicated the heretical Marcion, while another pope of this name was succeeded by Gregory XIII and standardized the Mass in his Roman Missal of 1570. Another pope of this name beatified Joan of Arc, while, a different pope of this name published the encyclical, Humani Generis.. One pope of this name published the encyclcial Munificentissimus Deus which established the Assumption as dogma. While one Pope by this name was the last to be canonized, a more famous Pope established the Immaculate Conception as doctrine with Ineffibilis Deus. For ten points, name this papal appellation, the ninth of whom declared papal infallibility as dogma and the twelfth of whom was in power during World War II.", "Purser", "M"]
["Among this god's possessions is the jewel Kaustubha, and his status is indicated by a curl of hair on his chest known as the srivatsa. One of this god's epithets comes from the time that he destroyed the demon Madhu, while an early story about this deity recounts how he carried off the body of the boar identified with the god Prajapati, which guarded the treasure of the asuras. One legend about this god recounts how he traversed the entire universe in three steps, and this story forms the basis for the later tales of Vamana. Depictions of this deity often show him reclining on the coils of the serpents Shesha, and his lesser known consort is the personification of the Eart, Bhumidevi. A dark-skinned god who rides the bird Garuda and bears such objects as the chakra, conch, and lotus, for ten points, identify this Hindu god, the consort of Lakshmi who with Shiva and Brahma makes up the Trimurti.", "Vishnu", "M"]
["This council drew a distinction between sin and concupiscence, or incentive to sin, which \"the Catholic Church has never understood\u0085to be called sin.\" It decreed that a bishop, by himself, has the power to degrade clerics from \"sacred Orders\" \"on account of grievous crimes,\" though bishops themselves are immune to witnesses who are not of \"good life\" or \"in good esteem and reputation.\" Salmeron and Lainez were the only participants who were allowed to preach. This council was briefly moved to Bologna, then moved back to the original location due to pressure from Charles V. For 10 points, name this council lasting from 1545 to 1563, in which all major doctrines of Catholicism, like transubstantiation, were reaffirmed in response to Protestant \"heresies\".", "Council of Trent", "M"]
["It concludes with the statement \"In the platter are placed three things: truth, contentment, and wisdom, as well as the nectar of His Name\". Its also includes the evening verses known as \"Sohila\", while all of its words are sometimes referred to as \"bani\", or \"voice\". Its more important sections include the aforementioned Mundavani verse, the long poem known as the Japji, and the opening Mul Mantra hymn that summarizes belief in \"Ek Onkar\", or \"One God\". Written primarily in Angad's Gurmukhi script, it was first compiled by Arjun and since that time its original copy has been held within the Golden Temple of Amritsar. Succeeding Gobind Singh as the Guru Granth Sahib, For ten points, name this foremost holy text of Sikhism", "Guru Granth Sahib", "M"]
["Anquetil Duperron's 1775 French and Latin translations of them brought them to the West. The last of them, the Muktika, consists primarily of the catalogue, making the Advaita canon self-referential. There are approximately ten \"principal\" ones, regarded as Sruti, or sacred texts, including the Isha, which describes the nature of the Supreme Being, and the Prashna, which describes six pupils asking their master Pippalada a question each about nature of the universe and of Hinduism. They would later be a major influence on Arthur Schopenhauer, who praised them greatly in his work The World as Will and Representation. For ten points, name these sacred Hindu texts, comprised of approximately 100 commentaries on the Vedas.", "Upanishads", "M"]
["Followers of this religion refer to the world as the \"ten thousand things\" and its founding is believed to have ushered in the Third Period of Salvation. Its followers formerly communicated with the dead through s\u00e9ances until this practice was banned by the country in which it is based and Earth is considered the 68th worst of the 72 planets believed to be inhabited by people. Its most notable symbol of the divine force, which it claims is worshipped by all religions, is the left eye, which represents Yang. Its structure mimics that of Catholicism, including a Pope and Cardinals. With a name that translates as \"High Tower\", for 10 points, name this syncretic religion founded in Vietnam in 1926 by Ngo Van Chieu that counts among its saints Sun Yat-sen, Pericles, Joan of Arc, and Victor Hugo.", "Cao Dai", "M"]
["Buildings named for Sehzade and Suleymanye were modeled on this older building. The Mosaic of the Donors is located above the Vestibule of the Warriors, which is the modern entrance to this building. Jesus, next to the Virgin Mary and St. John the Baptist, holds Book of Gospels in the mostly-damaged De\u00ebsis Mosaic at the southern gallery. A seraphim decorates each of the triangular pendentive, which supports the central dome, surrounded by forty windows so that it appears to be floating. An earlier version of this building was destroyed in the Nika Revolt. For 10 points, identify this church in present-day Istanbul commissioned from Isidorus and Anthemius by Justinian I, the Church of Holy Wisdom.", "Hagia Sophia", "M"]
["The titular figure's statement \"Think upon me, my God, for good\", has been called boastful by many Jewish leaders. In its longest segment it explains the location of the ten gates of Jerusalem and describes how the Jews rebuilt the walls of the city. In the Hebrew Bible it is included in the Ketuvim as part of the Book of Ezra, with whom it likely shares an author. It tells of a Babylon-born Jew who was cupbearer to the Persian king Artaxerxes I, who assigned him to make a census of the Jews and organize them in preparation for possible Egyptian invastion, despite the interference of Tobias and Sanballat. For 10 points name this historical book of the Old Testament, which is followed by Tobit in the Catholic Bible and Esther in the Protestant Bible.", "Nehemiah", "M"]
["This man expresses his wish to be \"buried in the ground like a stillborn child\" and at the end of the book in which he figures, all of his brothers and sisters give him gold rings. A son of Barakel the Buzite with a name meaning \"He is my God\" delivers four speeches on this man's behalf. The Lord tells this man to look to a being that \"ranks first among the works of God\" and conceals itself within the shadow of the lotuses, called the behemoth. This man's house collapses and his herds are lost, while his three friends Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar attempt to get him to give up. For 10 points, name this man of Uz who is a servant of God and is placed in the hands of Satan to prove his devotion in his namesake book of the Bible, which comes between Proverbs and Song of Songs.", "Job", "M"]
["Early in life, he helped prepare Wolfe's attack on Quebec by mapping the estuary of the St. Lawrence River. He helped prevent scurvy by packing sauerkraut on his first voyage, a trip meant to observe the passage of Venus in front of the Sun from a particular location that was once known as George III. His second voyage was meant to determine the status of a land that he had previously studied in his first voyage and was once known as New Holland. However, he may be most well known for his third voyage, where it is believed he was thought to be the god Lono after landing at a group of islands he named the Sandwich Islands. FTP, name this explorer who commanded the Endeavour and Resolution, a 18th century British explorer who died in Hawaii after mapping much of New Zealand and Australia.", "James Cook", "M"]
["Its founder taught the practice of \"wall-gazing,\" and one of its patriarchs wrote The Platform Sutra.", "Zen", "M"]
["One of the letters that begin this work is addressed \"to the angel of the church in Philadelphia.\" That letter contains a message that reads, \"I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name.\" While the authorship of this work has been debated, this book's description of Jesus as \"the Word of God\" is shared with only four other New Testament books, all of which are associated with its traditional author. It is also widely debated whether this work is a purely symbolic work, a cryptic depiction of contemporary Roman events, a panorama of church history, or a description of the end of history. Revealed to the Apostle John on the isle of Patmos, FTP, identify this final book of the New Testament.", "Frederick Denison Maurice", "M"]
["A \"little\" form of this holiday is celebrated in leap years, and children are instructed to make noise on this holiday.", "Purim", "M"]
["Its speaker instructs you to \"rejoice, and be exceeding glad,\" and he has \"not come to destroy, but to fulfill.\"", "Sermon on the Mount", "M"]
["Its main text is considered to be a living entity, and is accorded the same status as this religion's masters.", "Sikhism", "H"]
["One of this movement's foundational texts concludes with a \"Diploma\" in a final chapter on \"The Theological Lawgiver of Creation.\"", "Rastafari", "H"]
["James Tod was a British representative to the areas ruled by them, and published two volumes on the history of these people. These people are thought to have arisen after undergoing a cleansing ritual at Mount Abu. The Chandelas were one group of these people, who notably built an elaborate temple complex at Khajuraho. Chand Bardai served as the court poet for another one of them who failed to stop the forces of Muhammad Ghori for a second time at Tarain; that member, Prithvi Raj III was a member of the Chauhan dynasty. The marriage between (*) Akbar and Jodha-Bai and that between Jahangir and Jagat Gosain strengthened the alliances between Mughals and these people, who also included the man who attempted to defeat Babur at Khanua, Rana Sangha. For 10 points, identify these rulers, a class of Kshatriya warriors whose dominion extended over much of modern-day Rajasthan and other portions of northern India.", "Rajput", "H"]
["One of these works is a list of questions beginning \"This I ask thee, tell me truly,\" that contains such queries as \"Who is by generation the Father of Right, at the first?\" and \"What artist made light and darkness?\" These works are based on proto-poems called \"haitim,\" which Martin Schwartz argues are based on concatenation because of the fact that \"haitim\" and the word for \"fetter\" come from the same root in a seminal paper about their lexical \"concentric rings.\"", "The", "H"]
["One of these creatures was sired by Hamskerpnir and Gardrofa and is capable of flight, while another one of these creatures is borrowed by Skirnir during the wooing of Gerd and has bloody feet. In addition to Hofvarpnir, which accompanies Frigg's maidservant Gna, and Frey's Blodughofi, Dagr and Nott own another pair of these named Skinfaxi and Hrimfaxi, while Arvakr and Alsvidr are others that belong to Sol. Another one of these creatures is the grandfather of Grani, while the one living near (*)", "Horse", "H"]
["Functions of the critical value specified by this theorem approximate Bastiaan's dual function, while if rates increase from critical, they are better modeled via Gabor analysis. In practice, this expression may be implemented using a Kupfmuller Integralsinus filter, and part of the purpose for imaging programming involving it is to avoid the formation of moire patterns, (*)", "Whittaker-Nyquist-Shannon-Kotel'nikov Theorem ", "H"]
["In Japanese myth, these entities were incorporated into the attendants of Koumokuten, while one named Muscalinda protects the Buddha and one named Ulupi mothered Iravat. One of them pimped out his sister to Jaratkaru, producing the rishi Astika, who helped protect them from a fire of buttery doom. One of these individuals poisoned the meal of King Parikshit, earning the enmity of Janamejaya, and fathered Aswasena. A single Kadamba tree grew on the banks of the Yamuna until Krishna's encounter with one of them named Kaliya. Takshaka and the goddess Manasa are venerated by this group, who are linked with the holder of the sky and are led by a figure who bound himself to", "Nagas", "H"]
["An individual who would become king as a result of this event was conceived by a man covered in gold that arrived in a silver boat and asked his mother \"Shall I have an hour of lovemaking with you?\" A golden ring given by that father would later be used to trigger the second event of this name, which resulted in the secret of agriculture being revealed by Bres. One of these events took place at Cong and one figure that took part in that event lost his (*)", "CATH database", "H"]
["One writing of this religious group cautions those \"that call themselves lovers of the Ancient Beauty\" and encourages the pursuits of knowledge while condemning \"sciences that begin with words and end with words\". Another set of writings of this group includes sections named for the titular objects, including those of (*) wonderment, contentment, and \"true poverty and absolute nothingness.\" In addition to the Seven Valleys and the six taraji, The Promise of World Peace was also written by an important figure in its early history, and an important observation of its followers is the Nineteen Day Feast. The \"continental counselors\" and the Hands of the Cause of God are organs of this religion, whose chief governing body is the Universal House of Justice. Shoghi Effendi led this group, an outgrowth of the Bab'ist sect, after the death of its founder, Nirza Hussein Ali Nuri. For 10 points, name this inclusive religion founded in the 19th century.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["Some scholars have argued that most of this man's book was written by a different source from his prayer in chapter 2, and one of the ironies of this character is that, while he is deceitful, his father's name means \"truth.\" This man makes a cameo eight books before his own and is told to anoint Jehu as rightful king. The Yalkut Shimoni asserts that after this man performed his commanded task, the King of the city to which he had traveled tore down his palace and ordered that both the people and beasts wear sackcloth and ashes in repentance, though this man was disappointed that they were shown mercy at all. A recurring theme at the beginning of the story is this man's \"going down,\" first to Joppa and then into his napping spot, the hold of a ship. This son of Amittai's book falls between those of Obadiah and Micah and is read every year on Yom Kippur. For ten points name this reluctant prophet of the Hebrew Bible who eventually prophesies the destruction of Nineveh after failing to run away.", "Jonah", "H"]
["Karl Barth claimed that church history was \"utterly weak\" since the distinction between God and human is too great one work with this title. Another work with this name cites Hosea to show that \"the Lord is the Lord of all\". That second work's author asks \"Who will rescue me from this body of death?\" in a section that claims that \"apart from the law, sin lies dead\". This work's thirteenth chapter implores its readers to submit to existing authorities, for they \"have all been instituted by God\", and its first chapter accuses \"women [who] exchanged natural intercourse for unnatural\"", "Pauline epistles", "H"]
["One character in this work sees the river of filth and the great and spacious building, part of his vision of the Tree of Life. That character is the namesake of another character who is later accused of being a conspirator in the murder of a chief judge after he correctly predicts the murder and who the murderer was. Another character in this work leads an army of two thousand stripling warriors into battle, and none of them died because they followed what their mothers had taught them. Another section of this work claims that a group of people known as the Jaredites migrated in large barges soon after the Tower of Babel but were destroyed because of wickedness, and especially \"secret combinations\". For 10 points-name this work, containing Ether, Helaman, and Nephi, which was revealed by Moroni to Joseph Smith, the holiest book of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.", "Book of Mormon", "H"]
["The Fuke sect of this religion practices suizen, while some sects of this religion practice a loud belly chant known as the katsu. Guiyang, Linji, Caodong, Yunmen, and Fayan are known as the \"Five Houses\" of this religion, and it was founded by a man originally named Bodhitara. Shikantaza and the Zenshuji mission are commonly associated with the Soto sect of this religion, and kinhin, sesshin, and zazen are the most common forms of meditation in this religion. For 10 points-name this religion, founded by Bodhidharma, which has produced a large amount of paradoxical stories and sayings, known as koans.", "Zen", "H"]
["In one story of this religion, one god creates a serpent called Azi Dahaka, but that serpent is defeated when Mithra draws his mace. In another story in this religion, that god is defeated in battle by Tishtyra, and is thus prevented from preventing the rains from coming. One ritual in this religion involves the parahaoma, a liquid made from the Haoma plant, as well as consecrated water and leaves from a pomegranate tree. The main text of this religion contains sections such as The Gathas, The Yasna, and The Vendidad, and contains a verse that reads, \"I praise good thoughts, good words, and good deeds and those that are to be thought, spoken, and done\". For 10 points-name this religion, whose followers believe that Angra Mainyu will be defeated at the end of the world by Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["One character in this work is called Dorcas and dies in Joppa before being brought back to life. Another character in this work had lain daily at the gate of the temple called Beautiful but is told by one man, \"silver and gold have I none\" before being healed of his lifelong disability. In addition to Tabitha and an unnamed lame man, this work, dedicated to Theophilus, also contains one character who is called as an apostle in Greece with Timon and Parmenas, and later sees Jesus on the right hand of God while being stoned to death in Jerusalem. For 10 points-name this work about the Christian church directly after the death and resurrection of Christ, the fifth book of the New Testament.", "Acts of the Apostles", "E"]
["Scholar Ahmad Deedat advanced in his writings the swoon hypothesis regarding this figure. Scholarly investigations of this figure were first initiated by Hermann Samuel Reimarus. This figure was created as a character out of cloth according to Bruno Bauer. This figure's sayings were collected in Greek in the Q document. One of this figure's brothers was the first bishop of Jerusalem known as James the Just. Caiaphas arrested this man while this man was praying on the Mount of Olives. Executed by Pontius Pilate and betrayed by Judas Iscariot, for 10 points, name this son of Mary who founded a namesake religion related to Islam and Judaism.", "Jesus", "E"]
["Unlike the Aborigine religion, the rainbow serpent Ayida Weddo is married to Damballa in this religion. Ellegua shares the same role as the pipe smoking Papa Legba in this religion. The less aggressive Rada family contrasts with the more aggressive Petwo family in this religion. Pigs are sacrificed during the manje rituals and black magic is practiced by the bokors in this religion. Adherents of this religion must control their gwo-bon-ange and ti-bon-ange in order to please the anvizibs, zanjs, and loas. A result of syncretism between Christian and African traditions, for 10 points, name this religion associated with magical namesake zombie dolls.", "Voodoo", "E"]
["According to this book, during the reign of Zedekiah a man named Lehi led his family to the Promised Land. Later in this book, the evil Lamanites defeat the Nephites. In regards to linguistics, genetics, and archaeology this book advances the notion of an Israeli tribe migrating to the Americas. Oliver Cowdery claimed to have witnessed the translation of this book from the Golden Plates received from Moroni. For 10 points, name this religious work published by Joseph Smith for an organization constituted by Latter-Day Saints based mainly in the state of Utah.", "Book of Mormon", "E"]
["Caius of Rome attributed this work to the heresiarch named Cerinthus. This work's second and third chapters consist of short epistles to the seven churches of Asia, and its final section describes the release of the great dragon after the millennial reign and its short-lived control of Gog and Magog. This work was supposedly written on the island of Patmos by the John the Apostle. This Biblical book includes the murder of the great harlot representing Babylon and the opening of the seven seals. For 10 points, name this final book of the New Testament depicting Conquest, War, Famine, and Death as the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.", "Book of Revelation", "E"]
["Pope Sixtus IV established this concept's feast and this concept was established as dogma by Pius IX. In Ineffabilis Deus, Pius IX claimed scriptural evidence for this concept in the Book of Luke 1:28, where Gabriel offers a greeting, and in Genesis 3:15, in a warning made by God towards the serpent. Protestants reject this doctrine, since Jesus is the only figure stated in the Bible to have no sin but Catholics accept it for that very reason. Arguing that Mary was in complete faith throughout her entire life, for 10 points, name this doctrine which states that the Virgin was protected by God from Original Sin at the birth of Christ.", "Immaculate Conception", "E"]
["One story related by this philosophy is that of a cook who could dismember an ox without doing anything, and another well-known analogy states that the humans live and act in the namesake entity of this school of thought as fish live and act in water. Important concepts in this philosophy include those of \"clarity\" and \"effortless action\"; namely, ming and wu wei. It explains the concept of de, or energy, in terms of yin and yang, and its two main exponents, Zhuangzi and Lao-Tzu, may have never existed. Concerned with \"the way,\" for 10 points, name this Chinese school of thought that is not Confucianism.", "Taoism", "E"]
["Followers of this religion founded the now-destroyed Pinnacle Commune and were inspired by the tract \"The Promise Key\", written by Leonard Howell. Followers of this religion gather in meetings called \"reasonings\" and \"grounations,\" and another well-known text of this religious movement was written by Robert Rogers. As well as following the Holy Piby, Revelation 5:5 and 19:16 are used to interpret statements made by Marcus Garvey, a precursor to this religion, whose followers ritually smoke marijuana and wear dreadlocks. Honoring Haile Selassie as God, for 10 points, name this Jamaican religion popularized by Bob Marley.", "Rastafari", "E"]
["In rabbinical depctions, this figure is situated behind a screen that breaks when a bird, actually Satan in disguise, is shot. This figure used a request for the hand of Abishag as a pretext for killing Adonijah, and her unnamed first son by a certain lover was stillborn. This daughter of Eliam was compared to a sheep belonging to a poor farmer in a story told by Nathan, who declared the \"sword would not depart\" from the household of a certain king after he seduced this wife of Uriah the Hittite and mother of Solomon. First sighted while bathing on a roof, for 10 points, name this woman with whom King David committed adultery.", "Bathsheba", "E"]
["Born into a Khatri caste, this figure purportedly demonstrated interest in the divine to a teacher by explaining the implications of the first letter of the alphabet. Stories from this figure's life are collected in vars, which were written by the scribe Bhai Gurdas, as well as in the Janam-sakhis, which also detail this figure's last days in Kartarpur. At age thirty, while bathing in the Kali Bein, this figure suddenly decided to engage in pilgrimage to locations such as Tibet and Mecca, declaring that \"here is no Hindu, there is no Muslim.\" Succeeded by Baba Lehna, for 10 points, name this founder and first guru of Sikhism.", "Guru Nanak", "E"]
["Members of this relgion consider an early proponent, Anushtakin ad-Darazi, to be a heretic, and practice taqiya, an act of hiding their faith. Following the Rasa'il al-hikmah, practitioners of this religion adhere to seven fundamental pillars and are separated into either a juhhal group or a higher uqqal group. Followers of this religion faced persecution by the Fatimids, though they view the dynasty's sixth caliph as divine. Calling themselves Muwahhidun and represented by a star with colors for each of its five principles, for 10 points, name this religion that awaits the coming of al-Hakim and which is centered in Lebanon and Syria.", "Druze", "M"]
["In this book, Moses made a brass serpent to save people from being bitten by snakes. Balaam's donkey talks to Balaam when the donkey is blocked by an angel which Balaam cannot see, and on Mount Hor, Aaron dies. Depicting most of the Israelites forty year trek and coming between Leviticus and Deuteronomy, for 10 points, this is what book of the bible so named because it tells how many members were in each of the twelve tribes of Israel.", "Number", "M"]
["The Pali Canon is the standard collection of scriptures of one branch of this religion, which also preaches the samsara, the antithesis of heaven. The sangha, or community, is one of the Three Jewels of this religion, and this religion also preaches the ideas of the Middle Way and the concepts of dukkha and bohdi, both part of the Four Nobel Truths, and the Dharmachakra represents this religion's Eight Fold Path. Theravada and Mahayana are two of the branches of - for 10 points - what Asian religion that preaches the attainment of nirvana, founded by Siddhartha Gautama?", "Buddhism", "M"]
["According to the Twelver Shi'ah, those who travel more than 40 miles in a day are exempt from this practice. In Islam it is called sawm and is ended by the Eid al-Fitr. The Eastern Orthodox dedicates four seasons of it, one of which is during the Holy Week. Jewish traditions dictate that it be practiced to lament the assassination of the governor of Judah, Gedalia. Moses performed this action before receiving the tablets on a mountain from God. For 10 points, identify this religious practice observed during the daylight hours of Ramadan and also during Yom Kippur.", "Fasting", "M"]
["He witnessed a beating of a slave in his youth and because he later killed the taskmaster who was inflicting harm, he was forced to flee Egypt to the land of Midian, where he marries Tzipporah, the daughter of a local priest. He also appears in the Qu'ran, urging Muhammad to negotiate with Allah to reduce the number of daily prayers to five. His most memorable act came when he served as mediator between his followers and Jehovah while receiving the Ten Commandments on Mount Sinai. For 10 points, identify this Jewish leader who led his people out of Egypt after causing the plagues, as described in Exodus.", "Moses", "E"]
["Members of this faith use four or five intercalary days to prepare for a nineteen-day fast during the last of its calendar's nineteen months, and it is symbolized by a nine-pointed star. Sacred writings of this faith include The Seven Valleys and the Book of Certitude. Known for its World Centre in Haifa, Israel, and for its promotion of religious and racial unity, this is, for 10 points, what religion believing in God's gradual revelation through figures like Krishna, Jesus, and, more recently, the Bab and Baha'ullah?", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "E"]
["A description of this man's father, Zachariah, opens the Gospel of Luke, and the Visitation occurred to his mother Elizabeth. Also known for his diet of wild locusts, Salome demanded this figure's head on a silver platter from King Herod, who imprisoned and executed him. For 10 points, name this prophet who lived in the wilderness, a New Testament figure who got his epithet from performing an aquatic sacrament on people including Jesus Christ.", "John the Baptist", "E"]
["One founding story of this religion tells of five men who went into a tent expecting decapitation, starting this faith's military order, the Khalsa. That term now applies to anyone who undergoes this faith's baptism from an iron bowl of water, and such adherents carry the kirpan, a ceremonial dagger, and maintain long hair as part of the \"Five K's.\" For 10 points, name this monotheistic religion expounded by Nanak which also counts the Adi Granth among its Gurus, a faith from the Punjab region of India whose male adherents usually wear turbans.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["This text serves as the foundation for Vaishnism as well as a series of mental disciplines, the Yogas. In this text, a character who appears to combat adharma explains that \"By practice and detachment/ [the mind] is controlled.\" That character, a god, advises the son of Pandu that people should do their duties without \"attachment to the fruit of action.\" For 10 points, name this dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna before a battle which is contained in the Mahabarata.", "Bhagavad Gita", "E"]
["The fourth chapter of this book permits marriage of up to four wives so long as they are treated equally. Each verse of this text is called an ayat, and it was transmitted orally until its transcription was completed under Uthman. This book can be interpreted with the help of sayings called hadith, and its 96th sura contains Gabriel's command to \"recite.\" For 10 points, name this book, which contains the revelations of the angel Gabriel to the prophet Muhammad, the major holy book of Islam.", "Quran", "E"]
["Book 3 of one of this man's works states \"To Carthage I came\" and describes his studies there, and he blames pagans for the world's problems in another. This man describes how he followed Manichaeism for nine years in one work, and Book 9 of that work mentions the death of this man's mother Monica. This author of City of God was baptized by Saint Ambrose of Milan. For 10 points, name this fifth century Roman saint who described his youthful sins and later conversion in his Confessions.", "Augustine of Hippo", "H"]
["The second section of this work discusses hungry ghosts with throats the size of pinholes which appear when light shines from Lokas. On the sixth day of that period, stupidity can lead to transformation into an animal by the Brute-Loka. One of the major examples of (*) Nyingma literature, this work's third section, the Sidpa Bardo, explains how its subjects will face a \"mirror of karma\" in the final stages of their journey. For 10 points, name this text compiled by Padma Sambhava, which is read by lamas over the deceased.", "Bardo Thodol", "H"]
["Members of this religion publish The Clarion from what was originally Thompson's Pond. It prescribes that homes should include two elders and two eldresses and at one settlement named hosues for the points on a compass. Its credo is \"Beauty rests on utility,\" and leaders like Joseph Meachem and Lucy Wright established their practice of (*) celibacy. Its practitioners announce \"turn, turn will be our delight\" in their hymn \"Simple Gifts\". For 10 points, name this denomination founded by Mother Ann Lee.", "Shakers", "H"]
["The Romans called this figure \"Nobilis Decurio\" or the Minister of Mines, while Mark and Luke referred to him as a bouleutes, alluding to his membership in the Sanhedrin. In the Gospel of Nicodemus, he incurs the wrath of Jewish elders for asking Pilate for the (*) body of Christ. He earlier caught the blood of Christ in a cup. For 10 points, name this figure, later referred to as John of Glastonbury, who sent that cup, the Holy Grail, to England in a story expanded by Robert de Boron.", "Joseph of Arimathea", "H"]
["Its medicinal form, known to produce balance in the Vata and Putta, has the consistency of Thaila. Its burning is also present during the ceremony of Aarti, and on Maha Shivatri, it appears along with milk, sugar, dahi (DA-hee), and honey in the (*) Panchamrut sacrifice It is complete when a white froth appears at its surface and the resulting mixture is filtered to yield an oil-like substance. For 10 points, name this Indian ritual substance and food, obtained by removing the golden liquid from a pot of melted butter.", "Ghee", "H"]
["Monks in this belief system collect their food from other houses and may sit while eating. Its highest monks are allowed only twelve possessions. This group denies that kevalis no longer require food, and it believes in the succession of the (*) woman Mallinatha. This sect's most visible difference from its rival is its denial of the practice of nudity by ascetics, instead advocating the wearing of white clothing. For 10 points, identify this major sect of Jainism along with the Digambara.", "Svetambaras ", "H"]
["One text of this religion mentions Arthur Henderson's apathy. In addition to God Passes By, another work calls for further participation in the Second Seven Year Plan, Citadel of Faith. A more famous text commands those of age 15 to 70 to pray towards the shrine of this religion's (*) founder, who wrote about the landmarks of search, love, and unity in The Seven Valleys and the Four Valleys. For 10 points, name this religion whose teachings are collected in the Kitab-i-Iqan and the Kitab-i-Aqdas, founded by Bahaullah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["It is referred to in first Corinthians, chapter 16, and in Italy it is customary to scatter rose leaves from the ceilings of churches on this day. It is celebrated in Eastern Europe with green branches. Its antecedent feast, known as Shauvot, dates back to ancient times; its origin in the Catholic Church dates back to an occasion with a mighty wind, tongues of fire, and super-language powers. For ten points, name this Christian feast, commemorating the arrival of the Holy Spirit and occurring fifty days after Easter.", "Pentecost", "H"]
["This man wrote that rulers good or bad should be obeyed, unless they try to strip the people of Christianity. His rival was the author of Christianismi Restitutio. That publication led that rival of this man, Michael Servetus, to be burned at the stake. He formulated the ideas of irresistible grace and total depravity, and the most famous tenet of this man's religion was rebuffed at the Synod of Dort. For ten points, name this Genevese theologian that wrote and Institutes of the Christian Religion that believed in predestination.", "John Calvin", "H"]
["This biblical figure graces a text providing information on Belphagor, Asmodeus and other demons. This man wrote \"I made myself pools from which to water the forest of growing trees,\" which led to pools being named for him near Etam. He amassed fourteen hundred chariots and twelve thousand horsemen and built Ezion-Gebner and Tadmor. This collector of 666 talents of gold wrote a text whose voice alternates between two lovers and another text that begins by stating everything is meaningless. For ten points, name this near- baby splitter that built a temple in Jerusalem who wrote Ecclesiastes and another book known as his \"Songs.\"", "Solomon", "H"]
["Its calendar has its 28th day be called \"Earth\" and its 29th day \"Sacred Invocation.\" It holds that the bottom half of the universe was the second of the seven creations and one hero of it discovers fire in a rock. That hero is Hoshang, a descendant of Gayomard. Sinners will be punished for three days in the end, as Saoshyant will square off against evil. Its follwers pray in front of Fire Temples and their dead reside in towers of silence. For ten points, name this religion whose texts like Visperard and Yasna are found in the Avesta, which relates tales about Ahura Mazda, founded by a namesake Persian prophet.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["[JM] This book's second section compares the joy of possessing the truth while others search in vain to standing on shore watching a shipwreck or watching a battle from a safe place. Its third section argues that a living being's vital spirit dissipates into space after death rather than being immortal. Sadly, the existence of furries refutes its fourth section's assertion that \"the one stimulus that evokes seed from the human body is the human form.\" This book refutes the idea that types of matter are made up of", "DE", "H"]
["[JM] According to these people, their sacred artifacts were created when two endlessly pregnant sisters broke off pieces of their incredibly long vulvas. A goddess of these people was tormented by her offspring growing inside her until Barraiya speared her, resulting in their birth from her newly created vagina. Figures in their mythology include Yurlungur, a reptile who swallowed and then regurgitated the Wawalag sisters, and the creator goddess", "Aborigine", "H"]
["[JM] According to musicologist Johanna Spector, the melody for this prayer derives from the ninth century cantillation of the beginning of Genesis. An 1844 theological conference in Brunswick unanimously ruled that this prayer was superfluous and should be removed from the liturgy. Meir of Rothenburg developed the custom of reciting \"Bi-yeshibah shel ma'alah\" before this prayer, which Rabbenu Tam attempted to change into the imperfect tense. Meir ben Samuel changed the language of this prayer to mention the", "Kol Nidre", "H"]
["Like the Moravians, this group revived the early Christian practice of the Love Feast, and this denomination includes the Order of Saint Luke. One branch of Arminianism holds this denomination's founder, rather than Arminius himself, as its figurehead. This conflicted with the Calvinistic views of another major figure in this denomination who, like Hywel Harris, was famous in his day for open-air preaching. Including the preacher George Whitefield, for 10 points, name this Protestant denomination founded by John Wesley.", "Methodism", "H"]
["One figure in this religion established a nineteen month calendar. Its first and last Guardian was Shoghi Effendi, who made the haykal, or five-pointed star, its official symbol. Its other symbols include calligraphy of the Greatest Name, the Ringstone, and the nine-pointed star. The Guardianship is meant to complement the Universal House of Justice, the modern center for this religion. The founder of this religion was a follower of a man whose name meant \"gate,\" the Bab. For 10 points, name this Persian religion founded in the nineteenth century by Baha'u'llah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["An analysis of this text was the subject of the first theological work of Karl Barth. Chapters nine through eleven of this text are devoted to the concept of God and Israel and a chronicle of the Jewish people, and in chapter thirteen the author notes, \"love is the fulfilling of the law.\" Containing the line, \"for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life,\" much of this epistle focuses on the salvation of sinners through Jesus Christ. For 10 points, identify this longest of Paul's epistles, addressed to the residents of a major Italian city.", "Epistle to the Romans", "H"]
["One figure from this religion asked his servant to watch his corpse for seven days and wait for his spirit to return, but the servant burnt the body after six and a half days. Iron Crutch Li lives on Mount Panglai as one of this religion's Eight Immortals. Moderation, compassion, and humility form this religion's Three Jewels, and its supreme god is the Jade Emperor. One of this religion's tenets meaning \"without action\" is called \"wu wei\" and is outlined in its central text, the Tao Te Ching. For 10 points, name this eastern religion founded by Laozi.", "Taoism", "H"]
["This man ordered Michael Servetus burned at the stake for heresy. Followers of this man included Franciscus Gomarus and Theodore Beza, and some of this man's ideas were criticized at the Synod of Dort by Arminius. This man's list of \"Five Points\" includes total depravity, and he summed up his views in his book Institutes of the Christian Religion. This man's religious ideas were carried to Scotland by John Knox, who founded Presbyterianism. For 10 points, name this Protestant theologian from Geneva, whose namesake denomination believes in Predestination.", "John Calvin", "H"]
["Holidays in this religion include the Day of Ashura. Members of this religion use the misbaha, a ninety nine bead rosary that represents the ninety nine names of God. Some members of this religion believe that an evil figure called the Dajjal will come before the end of the world, but be defeated by a good figure called the Mahdi. This religion's profession of faith is called the Shahada. Its members must perform Salah, or prayer, and Zakat, or alms-giving, as well as Hajj, one of this religion's Five Pillars. For ten points, name this religion founded by Mohammad.", "Islam", "H"]
["This man was rescued by an Ethiopian eunuch from the muddy cistern of Malkijah, the son of the king. This man had a vision of two baskets of figs, foreshadowing the future of the Jewish people. This man's message concerned the impending punishment of the Kingdom of Judah. As advisor to Zedekiah, he predicted and survived the sack of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar and the start of the Babylonian captivity. His book follows Isaiah, and this man also wrote a book bemoaning the destruction of Jerusalem. For 10 points, name this Hebrew prophet and author of the Book of Lamentations.", "Jeremiah", "H"]
["The oldest of these texts is divided into Mandalas and suktas and was composed by rishis. The titles of the first three of these emphasize the knowledge of verses, sacrifice, and chants and comprise the trayi-vidya. This is joined with a text about spells and incantations, the Atharva. This collection of texts was followed by the Brahmanas and the Aranyakas, and they were often referred to as the Samhitas. Written between roughly 1500 B.C. and 1200 B.C. and containing the Sama, Yajur, and Rig, for 10 points, name these Sanskrit texts sacred to Hinduism.", "Vedas", "H"]
["Novices in this religion are called \"kossale\" and are confirmed through the \"kanzo\" initiation. Its adherents believe in a group of serpents called Simbi and and a figure named Erzulie, the spirit of love. This religion worships at a temple called the \"Hounfour,\" which houses its priestesses, called \"mambos,\" and its priests, referred to as \"houngans.\" Its practitioners believe in the supreme god Bondye. This religion holds that Papa Legba waits at the crossroads, allowing people access to the Guinee spirit world. For 10 points, name this religion whose adherents believe in \"loa\" spirits and which is practiced in Haiti.", "Voodoo", "H"]
["In an attempt to destroy the Gaokerena Tree, this figure created a giant lizard. This figure killed Gayomart, who was both the first hermaphrodite and first human. Priests who serve this figure are called Usij or Karapans. Because frogs are said to be followers of this figure, some people who believe in this figure carry a special staff to kill any frog they see. This figure is one of the two sons of Zurvan, and he is opposed by the Amesha Spentas. This figure's servants, the daevas, are described in the Zend Avesta as wanting to destroy plants or stop the rain. For 10 points, name this evil god from Zoroastrianism, the enemy of Ahura Mazda.", "Angra Mainyu", "E"]
["In one story about this man, he is mistaken for a god because he survives being bitten by a venomous snake. Afterwards, this man cures the father of Governor Publius. This man's servant, Barnabas, was his companion on his journeys, which included being shipwrecked on Malta. This man was healed by Ananias (AAH-nuh-NYE-us) after his eyes were covered in scales on the road to Damascus, causing this man to convert. For 10 points, name this early Christian leader, famous for his many letters, such as the one to the Corinthians.", "Paul the Apostle", "E"]
["This leader commemorated the hundred year anniversary of Leo XIII's Rerum Novarum in one writing. This leader's writings also include his Fides et Ratio, which argued for the intermingling of science and religion. That line of thought led this man to pardon Galileo Galilei. This leader chose the same name as his predecessor, who died after only thirty-three days as pope. This man was the first non-Italian pope in over four centuries, as he was born in Poland. For 10 points, name this pope whose death in 2005 led to his replacement by Benedict XVI.", "Pope John Paul II", "E"]
["In one passage of this book, Jesus claims that he is the \"true vine,\" while God is the \"gardener.\" This is the only canonical gospel to mention that Jesus washed the feet of the disciples. It uniquely records Jesus as saying \"verily\" twice. Church tradition holds that the author of this book also authored the Book of Revelation. It is the only non-synoptic canonical gospel, and it begins by stating \"In the beginning was the Word.\" It also contains the passage, \"God so loved the world that he gave his only Son.\" For 10 points, name this fourth book of the New Testament, that comes after Matthew, Mark, and Luke.", "Gospel of John", "E"]
["Items falling outside of this description are described using a word meaning \"torn,\" \"tref\" (TRAYF). Meat described by this word must be obtained from an animal killed in the \"shehitah\" (sheh-HEE-tuh) process. A circle containing the letter U is one common American symbol of certification for this status. It excludes birds of prey, shellfish, pork, and mixtures of milk and meat. For 10 points, give this word for food that is acceptable in Judaism.", "Kashrut", "E"]
["The last twenty-seven chapters of this book describe a \"suffering servant\" and are sometimes called the \"Book of Comfort.\" This book's twenty-third chapter compares Tyre to a prostitute. Its namesake describes removing his sandals and sackcloth to portend doom for Egypt and Cush. It prophesies the end of the Babylonian captivity as well as the birth of someone in the House of David who will be called \"Everlasting Father\" and \"Prince of Peace.\" For 10 points, name this book, that Christians believe foresees the birth of Christ, and was written by the first of the Major Prophets.", "Book of Isaiah", "E"]
["Mahayana Buddhists venerate one of these known as the \"Diamond Cutter,\" while Zen Buddhists follow the \"Platform\" one and Tendais revere the \"Lotus\" example. In Hinduism, this word, which is Sanskrit for \"thread,\" refers to a collection of aphorisms on any topic, but especially on ritual procedure. A specific one of these, written by Vatsyayana, is named for the Hindu concept of desire and contains chapters on wives and courtesans. For 10 points, identify this genre of religious literature, which includes a sexually explicit manual called the \"Kama\" version.", "Sutra", "E"]
["This man thanked God for \"Brother Fire\" and \"Sister Water\" in his religious song \"Canticle of the Sun.\" This man's father, a wealthy cloth merchant, disapproved of his career. This man had a vision in which an icon of a crucified Christ told him to repair Christ's house. This man's namesake order of monks still appoints a Custodian of the Holy Land as a result of his involvement in the Fifth Crusade. His order is also known as the Friars Minor. For 10 points, name this Catholic patron saint of animals, who was from Assisi.", "Francis of Assisi", "E"]
["This denomination allows married men to become priests, but it does not ordain men whose wives were previously widowed or divorced. Member churches are considered \"autocephalous\" (OUGHT-oh-SEFF-uh-luss) in this denomination. It engages in religious governance through \"metropolitans\" and celebrates Christmas on January 7th. This church considers the Patriarch of Constantinople its primary cleric. For 10 points, identify this Christian group, which split from Roman Catholicism in the Great Schism of 1054 and predominates in Russia, Greece, and much of Eastern Europe.", "Eastern Orthodox Church", "E"]
["Some hymns of this religion address its first convert, King Vishtaspa. A now-dead branch of this religion worshiped an indifferent god named Zurvan. Indian practitioners of this religion are known as Parsees. The sacred scripture of this religion includes a section on how to ward off demons called the Vendidad, as well as many hymns called the Gathas. This religion's dead are exposed to open air in Towers of Silence. Members of this religion believe in a god of darkness called Ahriman, who opposes the good god Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this dualistic faith that started in Iran.", "Zoroastrianism", "E"]
["Adherents of this religion believe that everyone has a \"gros bon ange\" (grahs bon AHNJ), in addition to a \"ti bon ange\" (tee bon AHNJ), which leaves the body during sleep. Some establishments for practicing this religion in Louisiana have an upside-down crucifix. In this religion, Baka is an evil spirit, and Shango is the spirit of the storms. Baron Samedi is one of the loa (LOW-uh) in this religion, which was syncretized from traditions such as the Yoruba. It is viewed as Satanic by many Catholics, which is one of the religions it draws from. For 10 points, name this Haitian religion that sometimes represents spirits with dolls.", "Voodoo", "E"]
["Documents important to this religion include the Kebra Nagast and the Holy Piby. This religion's dietary restriction is known as I-tal. This religion labels undesirable products of western civilization as Babylon. This religion regards Marcus Garvey as a prophet and refers to God as Jah. Other key precepts of this religion include the smoking of Ganja and the belief that founder Haile Selassie will establish a perfect state called Zion. For 10 points, name this religion most commonly followed by dreadlock wearing Jamaicans.", "Rastafari", "E"]
["In the fortune-telling scheme of this belief system, kichi (KEY-CHEE) signifies a blessing, while kyo signifies a curse. Honden and Torii (TO-REE-EE) make up the places of worship of this religion, the most famous of which is the Ise (EE-SAY) Shrine. \"The way of the gods\" is the literal name of this religion, although its objects of worship are spirits called kami. For 10 points, Amaterasu is the chief deity of what animistic religion of Japan?", "Shinto", "E"]
["This figure's father lost his speech until he gave this figure his name, and this figure \"jumped for joy\" within his mother after she saw her cousin. Like Jesus, one of this man's early followers was the disciple Andrew, and while preaching, this man dined on locusts and wild honey. This man was killed after Salome performed for her stepfather, and her mother, Herodias, requested this man's head on a platter. For 10 points, name this New Testament figure who preached from the desert about the coming of his cousin Jesus.", "John the Baptist", "E"]
["One title used for this man is \"Father of Dust,\" and during the Battle of Khaybar, this man tore off the door of a fort and used it as a shield. This man's forces were victorious at the Battle of the Camel. This man slept in Muhammad's bed as a decoy to Muhammad's attempted assassins during the Hegira. Some sources claim that this man was the only person born in the Ka'bah, and after Khadijah, he is said to be the second convert to Islam. For 10 points, name this husband of Muhammad's daughter Fatima, the first Imam of Shia Islam.", "Ali", "E"]
["Jacobus Arminius led a group who deviated from the teachings of this man known as the Remonstrants. This man studied with Martin Bucer during a period where he took refuge in Strasbourg. This man was responsible for the burning at the stake of Michael Servetus. This leader worked closely with Guillame Farel (gee-OHME fah-REHL). This man laid out his beliefs in his Institutes of the Christian Religion. This religious leader's doctrine of the elect implied a kind of predestination. For 10 points, name this Geneva preacher integral to the Protestant Reformation.", "John Calvin", "E"]
["This religion's texts include the Holy Piby, and one of this religion's saints is Marcus Garvey. This religion advocates \"livity,\" which involves drumming ceremonies called bingis. This religion uses the vegetarian I-tal diet. Followers of this religion believe that they are captives in Babylon. This religion draws its name from the belief that Haile Selassie is the Second Coming of Christ. It promotes wearing the colors red, green, gold, and black, along with dreadlocks. For 10 points, name this Jamaican religion that advocates using ganja for meditation and was the inspiration for reggae music.", "Rastafari", "E"]
["After scolding this figure for marrying an Ethiopian, this figure's sister was stricken with leprosy for seven days. This man flung a tree into the water at Marah to make it sweet, and this man's arms were held up by Hur and this man's brother to help his people defeat the Amalekites. This man married a daughter of Jethro of Midian, Zipporah, and trashed the golden calf idol created by his brother, Aaron. For 10 points, name this man who led the Israelites out of Egypt and received the Ten Commandments from God.", "Moses", "E"]
["One holy figure in this religion, Amar Das, compiled the Goindval Pothis. Members of this religion practice in gurdwaras, and an idealized figure in religion is Gobind. This religion's emblems of the Khalsa, which include long shorts, a steel bracelet, a comb, a ceremonial dagger, and uncut hair are known as the \"Five Ks.\" The holiest shrine in this religion is Amritsar's Golden Temple, and its scripture is the Adi Granth. For 10 points, name this Indian religion founded by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["The First Letter to the Corinthians states that this figure was the first to see Jesus risen. In Matthew, this figure attempted to imitate Jesus by walking on water, but failed. This man argued with Paul over the importance of circumcision for Christians. This man asked Jesus to wash not only his feet but his also head and hands before the Last Supper, and he was called a \"fisher of men\" along with his brother, Andrew. For 10 points, name this apostle who betrayed Jesus three times and was \"rock\" upon which Jesus built his Church, the first pope.", "Saint Peter", "E"]
["This figure disguised his wife as his sister in order to extort money from both a Pharaoh and Abimelech. This figure was blessed by Melchizedek (mel-KIZ-eh-deck), and this man sent Eliezer to his homeland to look for a bride for one of his sons. The younger of this man's two sons was born a year after his mother laughed at pair of visiting angels, while the elder was exiled into the desert with his mother Hagar. For 10 points, name this first Jewish patriarch, husband of Sarah, and father of Ishmael and Isaac.", "Abraham", "E"]
["The Nineteen Day Fast is a practice of this religion, and its calendar is divided into nineteen nineteen-day months. The Hands of the Cause of God are the successor's of Shoghi Effendi in this religion. Its supreme governing body is the Universal House of Justice and is located in Haifa, Israel. An offshoot of the teachings of the Bab, this religion was founded by Baha Ullah. For 10 points, name this religion that believes that the world's great religions are all manifestations of God.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "E"]
["Zorastrians celebrate this occurrence with a ritual handshake called the \"hamazor\" (hah-MAH-zore) on the day of Noruz (nor-OOZ). In Judaism, a version of this holiday is celebrated for trees on Tu bi-Shevat (TUBE-ish-VAHT). The main Jewish version of this event begins the High Holy Days and involves the eating of apples dipped in honey and the blowing of a \"shofar.\" That Jewish holiday, celebrating this occurence, is known as Rosh Hashanah (ROWSH hah-SHAH-nah). For 10 points, what is this day which, in the West, comes halfway between the Christian festivals of Christmas and Epiphany?", "New Year's Day", "E"]
["The Night of Power, celebrating an appearance by the angel Gabriel, occurs during this timeframe. It is associated with the practice of sawm [SOAM]. Its most prominent activity is preceded each day by the suhoor, and followed by the iftar. The elderly, ill, or those traveling are not required to abide by its most famous requirement. Its end is celebrated at the Eid al-Fitr [EED al-FIH-ter]. For 10 points, identify this ninth month of the Islamic calendar, during which believers are required to fast.", "Ramadan", "E"]
["The book named for this man includes the statement that \"Assyria [is] the rod of my anger,\" referring to Tiglath-Pileser III's invasion. Along with Micah, he discussed how nations will beat their swords into plowshares and not take up arms against each other. The Septuagint translation of his prophesy claims that a virgin will \"conceive and bear a son\" who was called Immanuel. For 10 points, name this prophet who warned Israel that its immorality would lead to an invasion, whose namesake book is found between the Song of Songs and Jeremiah.", "Isaiah", "E"]
["A military expedition against these people became known as \"Buchanan's Blunder\" and was led by Albert Sidney Johnston. That expedition came after some of these people allied with the Paiute (pie-YOO-tay) Indians to perpetrate the Mountain Meadows Massacre. The massacre took place in a state that these people called Deseret, where they fled after being driven out of Illinois and Missouri. For 10 points, name this religious group which inspired the enmity of eastern Americans for their practice of polygamy, and fled to Utah after the death of their founder, Joseph Smith.", "Mormons", "E"]
["At one point in this book, a figure is put on trial by the prosecutor Tertullus and left in prison until the governor Felix is replaced by Festus. Near the end of this book, that same person is shipwrecked on Malta while being transported to Rome. At the start of this book, Matthias is chosen to replace Judas, and the Ascension occurs. This book was written in Rome between 70 and 90 CE by Luke, and it describes Paul's missionary activities. For 10 points, name this book of the New Testament, which immediately follows the four gospels.", "Acts of the Apostles", "H"]
["The book P'ri Etz Hadar popularized one of these events, which was established by the mystics of Safed in the sixteenth century. In that version of this event, participants drink white wine, then mixtures of white and red wine, and finally only red wine. In addition to the version of this event celebrated on Tu B'Shvat, participants in a different one of these events sing songs such as \"Chad Gayda\" and \"Adir Hu.\" That version of this event ends with the phrase \"Next year in Jerusalem,\" and features the hunt for the missing afikomen. Participants in this event place charoset and bitter herbs between matzah and recount the story of the exodus of the Jews from Egypt. For 10 points, name this celebratory meal held during Passover.", "Passover Seder", "H"]
["In the Old Testament, this figure's birth was foretold by an angel to Manoah's wife, who had been barren for many years. On this man's way to his own wedding, he discovers bees nesting in the carcass of a lion and eats honey from that carcass. He once killed a thousand warriors with the jawbone of an ass. He was raised as a Nazarite, which meant he took certain vows. He later brought down the temple of Dagon on the heads of the Philistines after his betrayal. For 10 points, name this symbol of strength from the book of Judges whose hair was cut by the treacherous Delilah.", "Samson", "H"]
["Literature important to adherents of this religion includes biographies of its first leader called Janamsakhis (jah-nahm-sahk-ees). This religion celebrates the martyrdom of figures like Tegh Bahadur with its festivals called Gurpurabs. Followers of this faith worship in Gurdwaras and drink the holy water amrit to be inducted into the khalsa. Some adherents of this faith follow the \"Five K's,\" which mandate carrying a dagger and covering their uncut hair with a turban. For 10 points, name this Indian religion led in the past by a series of ten gurus.", "Sikhism", "H"]
["This figure creates an altar on Mount Ebal and carves the Ten Commandments into it. He is one of twelve spies sent to scout the land, but only he and Caleb gave a positive report. Two of this man's spies are saved by the prostitute Rahab. This figure prays for the sun and the moon to stop in their tracks during a battle with the Amorites. As Moses' successor, he leads the Israelites in conquering Canaan. For 10 points, name this Old Testament leader whose most famous military victory was against the city of Jericho, which fell after the Israelites circled its seven times.", "Joshua", "H"]
["This group met at the Chamber of Hewn Stones and consisted of seventy-one members. Members of this group sat in a semicircle facing the a leader called the \"nasi.\" One incarnation of this group was led by Rabban Gamliel. With oversight from Rome, this group handled matters of taxation, the census, and other administrative tasks in ancient Jerusalem. During one trial, this group was led by the high priest Caiaphus. For 10 points, name this Jewish council that opposed Jesus and his apostles in the New Testament gospels.", "Sanhedrin", "H"]
["A missive written to these people by St. Clement outlines the division of ministerial orders and the doctrine of apostolic succession. In earlier texts, they are asked \"If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing?\" and told that \"when I became a man, I put away childish things,\" shortly before the declaration \"For now we see through a glass, darkly.\" Other advice to these people approves the eating of meat offered to idols and suggests that women be silent in church. For 10 points, identify these Christian inhabitants of a certain Greek city who received two namesake Pauline epistles in the New Testament.", "Epistles to the Corinthians", "H"]
["It can be divided into thirty ajza (AJ-zah) each containing two ahzab (AH-zahb), or into seven stations called manazil (MAH-nah-zeel). Translated by Salman the Persian and Robert of Ketton, it is analyzed spiritually through tawil (tah-WEEL) and its commentary is known as tafsir (TAHF-seer). Its second chapter tells of how Samiri constructed the golden calf and was banished after Moses's return. Each of its chapters except the ninth opens with the basmala (bahs-MAHL-lah); those 114 chapters are known as suras. For 10 points, name this holy text of Islam.", "Quran", "H"]
["One book associated with this religion is translated as the \"Record of the Transmission of the Light.\" One common practice in this religion is counting one's breaths. One school in this religion was founded by Dogen, who emphasized \"practice-realization.\" Another school in this religion emphasizes riddles found in collections such as The Gateless Gate and The Blue Cliff Record. Those riddles, known as koans, include \"Does a dog have Buddha-nature?\" and \"What is the sound of one hand clapping?\". For 10 points, name this offshoot of Buddhism that emphasizes meditation and is common in Japan.", "Zen", "H"]
["After planting a vineyard, this figure became drunk and lied down naked in his tent, where he was seen by his youngest son. That incident caused this man to curse one of his grandsons to be \"the lowest of slaves\" to his brothers. This father of Shem, Japheth, and Ham made use a raven and dove to explore his surroundings at one point. That came before this man entered into the so-called Rainbow Covenant protecting all life from the recurrence of the event with which this man is most associated. For 10 points, name this Biblical figure who was commanded by God to build an ark to survive the great flood.", "Noah", "H"]
["This group carries on its traditional musical arts at its community in Maine at Sabbathday Lake. Their official name is The United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Coming. They were transplanted to America by Ann Lee, and they maintain their numbers only through conversions and adoption of orphans, as they practice strict celibacy. Their more popular name was originally meant to insult the contortions they made during the dances that comprised a large portion of their public worship. For 10 points, name this Protestant sect with a name similar to the group they broke off from, the Quakers.", "Shakers", "E"]
["Members of this religion believe in protecting the \"tenth gate\" of the human body, through the wearing of a dastar. Also on the head, the principles of kesh and kanga command members of this religion to refrain from cutting their (*) hair and carry a comb at all times. Those are among the \"Five Ks\" that initiated adults in this religion must follow. For 10 points, identify this monotheistic faith, which grew out of the mingling of Hinduism and Islam in the Punjab (POON-job) region of India, and was founded by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["This figure was buried in Shechem on land that his father obtained from Hamor's family. His two sons, Mannaseh and Ephraim, who were given shares in their grandfather's inheritance. While in prison, this man counseled a baker and a cupbearer, and he suggested the building of storehouses to alleviate the famine predicted in the (*) Pharaoh's dreams about skinny and fat cows. For 10 points, name this Biblical son of Jacob who relocated the Israelites to Egypt and had a multicolored coat.", "Joseph", "E"]
["This man was lowered over a wall in a basket to escape from a city where he had been greeted by Ananias. He brought food from Antioch to Jerusalem to help relieve a famine; like his mission to Cyprus, that journey was undertaken with (*) Barnabas. He participated in the stoning of St. Stephen, but converted to Christianity after hearing a voice ask \"Why do you persecute me?\" on the road to Damascus. For 10 points, name this author of epistles to the Romans, Corinthians, and several other groups, who along with Peter is the main focus of the Acts of the Apostles.", "Paul the Apostle", "E"]
["In Orthodoxy, the Theos Kyrios is not sung during the weekdays of this holiday, which is nicknamed the \"Days with Alleluia.\" Judas's spying on Jesus is commemorated on one Wednesday in this holiday, which begins on Clean Monday in Orthodox tradition. This holiday's final two (*) weeks are known as Passiontide and contain a commemoration of the Last Supper on Holy Thursday. Jesus's time spent resisting temptation in the desert explains the 40 day period of this holiday. For 10 points, name this Christian holiday associated with giving up pleasures.", "Lent", "E"]
["Although the central rite of this event is known as \"the Standing,\" standing is not required. At its end, an animal is slaughtered and eaten and women cut a single lock of hair. At its start, men don a robe of white cotton. A ritual of this event known as \"the Running\" was changed in 1990 after over 1400 people (*) died in a stampede and represents Hagar's journey to the Well of Zamzam. Participants in this event also throw seven stones at a pillar in the \"stoning of the devil\" and circle the Ka'aba seven times. For 10 points, name this pilgrimage to Mecca.", "Hajj", "E"]
["In this book, God describes the Behemoth, a hippopotamus; and the Leviathan, a crocodile. The title character asserts that a Vindicator will prove he is not a blasphemer. Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar are friends of the title character. An angel referred to as (*) Satan in this book is given carte blanche to make the title character's sons die, his land be taken away, and his health deteriorate. For 10 points, name this book of the bible about an Edomite who is so pious that he refuses to curse God no matter what hardships he goes through.", "Book of Job", "E"]
["One sect of this religion worships a figure \"of infinite light\" and seeks to be reborn in a place that is eighty-one times more excellent than any other. Another of its schools, the Yellow Hat sect, follows the \"diamond vehicle.\" Some members of this religion seek to become perfected beings called (*) \"arhats,\" while others wish to remain on Earth and instruct others, and are known as \"boddhisatvas.\" The Therevada and Mahayana schools are chief divisions of, for 10 points, what religion, founded by Siddartha Gautama, that also has a \"Zen\" form?", "Buddhism", "E"]
["One religious sect from this region venerates a figure born from a lotus in the Ocean of Milk, Padmasambhava, who taught the practice of dzogchen. Another sect in this region venerates the 17 Gwalyang Karmapas. Containing the Nyingma, Sakya, Kagyu and Gelug schools, this region has a spiritual leader emanating from Avalokitesvara named (*) Tenzin Gyatso, who was exiled to India, but was chosen because he was born at the same time that the previous leader died. For 10 points, name this region whose spiritual leader is the Dalai Lama.", "Tibet", "E"]
["One ritual in this belief system includes the use of a clay govi to help a person's spiritual self return to Ginen (GWEE-nen). That ritual is called the \"desounen\" and involves a person's gwobonanj (GWOH-boh-nahnj) and not the tibonanj (TEE-boh-nahnj). The priests in this system are called either (*) houngan or mambo, depending on gender. Its chief god is Bondye (BOHND-yay). Other deities in this religion are called loa (LOW-uh) and include Samedi and Legba. For 10 points, name this syncretic religion, often associated with Haiti and a certain kind of doll.", "Voodoo", "E"]
["The two primary forms of this religion are known as Rada and Petro. Its ceremonies include the kanzo and the taking of the ason, the latter of which involves ascending to the priesthood as either a mambo or a houngan (HOON-gahn). This religion reveres the (*) crossroads as the intersection between the earthly and spirit worlds, and venerates lwa (LO-uh) such as Ogoun (OH-\"goon\") and Legba. In this religion, nasty lwa (LO-uh) can create zombies. For 10 points, name this religion, most popularly practiced in Haiti.", "Voodoo", "E"]
["The Kufa (KOO-fuh) version of this text settles on dividing it into 6,236 ayahs (eye-AHZ), the largest of the four competing numbers. Other systems include a way to read it in one week, which divides it into seven manazils (muh-NAH-zeelz), and a way to read it in a month, comprised of thirty (*) juz (JEWZ). The most frequently used chapterization of this book creates sections such as \"The Key\" and \"The Cow,\" called suras (SOO-rahz). For 10 points, name this sacred text which was revealed in the early seventh century by Gabriel to Muhammad, in Islamic belief.", "Quran", "E"]
["Devadatta tried to kill this prophet, whose Fire Sermon preached that detachment liberates people from burning desires. He was disturbed by the sights of a dying man, a corpse, and an ascetic man, signs of the suffering he had been shielded from. After (*) meditating under the Bodhi (BO-dee) tree for forty-nine days, this prophet became enlightened. For 10 points, name this prophet who taught the Eightfold Path and founded a religion based on achieving nirvana.", "Gautama Buddha", "E"]
["A central symbol of this religion is a hand with a wheel on its palm. One sect of this religion requires that members be \"sky-clad,\" or nude, and the other sect believes that the figure Mallinath was female. This religion, which is divided into the (*) Svetambara (sh-VET-ahm-bara) and Digambara (DEE-gam-bara) sects, venerates twenty-four \"ford-builders\" or tirthankaras (TEAR-than-karas), including the final one, Mahavira. For 10 points, name this Indian religion which emphasizes ahimsa, or nonviolence.", "Jainism", "E"]
["In Exodus, this event occurred to a large number of people at Gilgal. One variation of this practice involves the extraction of a single drop of blood. In Islam, this event is known as Khitan or tahara, and is typically performed around seven years of age. In Judaism, this practice is performed by a (*) mohel eight days after birth. It was performed on Abraham when he was 99 years old, and is known as a Brit Milah. For 10 points, name this practice that involves cutting off the foreskin of a male.", "Circumcision", "E"]
["This event titles an Emmett Fox book about \"The Key to Success in Life.\" During this event, Jesus claims that marrying a divorced woman is equivalent to adultery, and condemns the ostentatious display of good works. Although Luke places it in a different context, (*) Matthew claims that Jesus first taught The Lord's Prayer during this event. This event begins with a list of eight groups of \"blessed\" people in the Beatitudes. For 10 points, name this event depicted in Matthew chapters 5 through 7, in which Jesus preaches from a mountaintop.", "Sermon on the Mount", "E"]
["According to the Talmud, these people worshipped the figure of a dove, which they built on Mount Gerizim. Though these people do not recognize the book of Psalms as canonical, they do celebrate Purim. This is the ethnicity of the woman from Sychar that Jesus talked to at Jacob's (*) Well, and of a person who ministered to a wounded traveler after a priest and a Levite had already passed by. For 10 points, give this ethnic group that split from the Jews, one of whom features in a parable about a \"good\" one.", "Samaritans", "E"]
["The Haoma plant plays an important role in this religion. In it, the idea of chaos and disorder is known as Druj and a group of divine spirits is called the (*) Amesha Spenta. This religion's evil spirit is referred to as Angra Mainyu. Adherents of this religion believe in exposing corpses to the elements, typically in structures known as Towers of Silence. The holy text of this religion is known as the Avesta, and its supreme deity is Ahura Mazda. For 10 points, name this dualistic Persian religion, whose founder is alternately called Zarathustra.", "Zoroastrianism", "E"]
["While staying in Midian, this figure protected seven shepherdesses from rude shepherds and won the hand of Zipporah. This figure quelled unrest by ensuring a steady supply of quail and manna. This figure once made water appear by striking a (*) rock with his staff, which he gained after observing God in a burning bush and killing a cruel slave overseer. This brother of Aaron received the tablets of the Ten Commandments after warning Pharaoh of the ten plagues. For 10 points, name this central figure in the book of Exodus.", "Moses", "E"]
["The only woman named in this text also titles this work's 19th chapter, and another chapter contains a letter to Solomon from the Queen of Sheba. In addition to \"Miryam\", another section of text contains the throne verse and is called \"The (*) Cow\". The chapters of this text are arranged in length from shortest to longest and are called suras. This text is supplemented by oral records of its transmitter's deeds, the hadith, and was first given on the Night of Power by Gabriel to Muhammad. For 10 points, name this primary religious text of Islam.", "Quran", "E"]
["One aspect of this belief system forbids the ingestion of pork, salt, or large fish in order to increase livity. Texts studied in this religion include The Promise Key, a modification of the Bible containing four books of Athlyi, the Holy Piby. In addition to practicing i-tal, adherents of this faith believe in \"everliving life\" and reject (*) Babylon, or western culture, in favor of Zion, or Africa. For 10 points, identify this religion founded by Marcus Garvey that regards Haile Selassie as the incarnation of Jha, or God, prominent in Jamaica.", "Rastafari", "E"]
["In the Letter to the Galatians, Paul uses this figure as a metaphor for the Jewish tradition that is now rejected for Christianity. Pilgrims on the hajj recall this figure's mother's search for water by running between two hills and drinking from the well of Zam Zam. In Islamic tradition, this figure's father attempted to kill him on (*) Mount Moria, while in Jewish tradition it is his brother who God demands to be sacrificed. For 10 points, name this eldest son of Abraham and Hagar who was sent into the desert by his stepmother Sarah, the brother of Isaac.", "Ishmael", "E"]
["The laws of this belief system are compiled in a book about \"Rejecting the Daevas,\" and this religion contrasts the concepts of asha and druj. One variant on this religion believes that a time god fathered the central spirits of this religion, and that the first man was (*) Gayomart. Some believers in this religion follow Zurvan, and many are laid on Towers of Silence after they die. Holy texts of this religion include the Gathas and the Vendidad. For 10 points, name this religion that contrasts the evil Angra Mainyu with Ahura Mazda, follows the Avestas, and was founded in Persia.", "Zoroastrianism", "E"]
["This book recommends leaving a scapegoat in the desert for Azazel. This book opens with instructions regarding the nature of burnt sacrifices, and its sixteenth and twenty-third chapters discuss rites for Yom Kippur. This book places seafood that lacks (*) fins and scales on a list of things that are abominations to God. Chapters seventeen through twenty six of this book are often referred to as the \"Holiness code.\" For 10 points name this book which precedes Numbers and follows Exodus, the third book of the Old Testament.", "Book of Leviticus", "E"]
["This figure's brothers included Jabal and Jabel, the fathers of farmers and musicians, and Tubal-Cain, the inventor of metalworking. This man cursed his grandson Canaan after Caanan's father had seen this figure drunk and naked. This father of Shem, Japheth and (*) Ham made a covenant with God after receiving an olive branch from a dove. That covenant took place on Mount Ararat and was symbolized by a rainbow. For 10 points, name this biblical figure who was ordered God to build an ark to survive a great flood.", "Noah", "E"]
["In this religion, manbo and oungan are the priestesses and priests in cities. Ounsi and ountogi perform music in the ceremonies of this religion, which celebrates Danbala on St. Patrick's Day. People in this religion believe they possess a \"gros-bon-ange\" and a \"ti-bon ange.\" This religion worships the god Bondye, and reveres the spirits (*) Legba and baron Samedi, two of its \"loas.\" For 10 points, name this religion, derived from African traditions and common in Haiti, that has namesake dolls.", "Voodoo", "E"]
["In John 6, verse 9, this figure asks how five barley loaves and two fishes could feed five thousand people. Pope Paul VI sent relics of this saint to Greece in 1964. Legend states that he travelled up the Dnieper river to establish the future location of Kiev. He was executed on the order of Aegeas (aa-JEE-us) in Patrae, and he was supposedly crucified on an (*) X-shaped cross. For 10 points, name this patron saint of Russia and Scotland, the brother of St. Peter.", "Andrew the Apostle", "E"]
["This book describes \"Two Witnesses\" as \"two olive trees, and the two candlesticks.\" One figure in this book is told to eat a little book before being given a rod and being told to measure a temple. This book also introduces a woman dressed in gold and scarlet known as the Mother of (*) Harlots and named the Whore of Babylon. Other events described in this book include seven angels blowing seven trumpets after the opening of seven seals. For 10 points, name this book, written by John on Patmos, that describes the end times and is the final book of the New Testament.", "Book of Revelation", "E"]
["The hymns Veni Creator Spiritus and Veni Sancte Spiritus were composed for this occasion. In The First Prayer Book of Edward VI, this event was referred to as Whitsunday. It commemorates a Biblical incident in which Jesus gave the Apostles the power to speak to people in all language. Most Christian groups consider it an extension of a (*) Jewish holiday that commemorates the giving of the law to Moses on Mount Sinai. For 10 points, name this seventh Sunday after Easter in Christianity, the equivalent to the Jewish holiday Shavout (shuh-VOO-it).", "Pentecost", "E"]
["In Jainism, this holiday celebrates the tirthankara Mahavira's passage into Nirvana. In Sikhism, Guru Hargobind's release from prison is celebrated on this festival. Kali is the subject of this holiday's devotion in Bengal. Other (*) worshippers use this holiday to commemorate Hanuman, Lakshmana, Sita, and Rama's return to the city of Ayodhya. It's fourth day is the first day of Karttika. For 10 points, name this holiday in Hinduism that involves lighting millions of candles across the country.", "Diwali", "E"]
["Self advancement among practitioners of this religion is described by the Bridge to Total Freedom. In this religion, the ARC and KRC triangles govern the stability of society. This religion emphasizes auditing, which it believes can occur with the help of E-meters. Volcanoes with hydrogen (*) bombs detonated inside were thought to have made thetans stick together in this religion, which despises an ancient alien named Xenu (ZEE-noo). For 10 points, name this religion that was built around the theory of dianetics by founder L. Ron Hubbard.", "Church of Scientology", "E"]
["During this holiday, one person announces that they lean on a pillow to remind themselves they can relax. Another person on this holiday is supposed to ask \"Why is this night different from all other nights?\" The other questions that are supposed to be asked at dinner during this holiday discuss eating only (*) bitter herbs which are dipped twice, and why Matzah is eaten during this holiday. This holiday commemorates the night when the angel of death skipped the houses of Jews when he killed Egyptians. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday that features the seder.", "Passover", "H"]
["Many major temples of this religion house atakhsh i warahran flames to ward off evil. Its followers believe that at the Bridge of the Separator, they will be judged by the messenger, the judge, and the keeper of covenants, respectively Sraosha, Rashnu, and Mithra. Though it isn't Sikhism, initiates don the sedra and kashti, an undershirt and girdle. Its followers believe that the six amesha spentas do battle agains the daevas created by Angra Mainyu. Sacred texts of this religion include the Vendidad, a collection of hymns known as Gathas, found in the Avesta. For 10 points, name this dualistic Persian religion with the principal good god Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["One story behind this event refers to the appearance of a poor dwarf to test a king's generosity, and sees that king become the king of the underworld after requesting that dwarf to step on him. Intricate patterns known as ran-goli are drawn on this event using powdered chalk, and it marks the transition from the month of Ash-win to Kartik. This holiday also sees the exchange of gifts between a brother and sister, and Sikhs refer to this festival as the Bandi Chhorh Divas and release prisoners on this day in memory of Guru Har Gobind Ji. Jains celebrate the establishment of dharma by Mahavira during it, though more famously, people celebrate the birth of Lakshmi and commemorats the defeat of Ravana and the return to Ayodha of Sita and Rama. Celebrated most prominently by lighting of diyas, or oil lamps, for 10 points, identify this Hindu festival of lights.", "Diwali", "H"]
["One scholar of this system, Jnanagarbha, expounded its unique distinction between paramarthasatya and samvritisatya, a non-Islamic doctrine of Double Truth. This tradition cleaves to an especially extreme form of pratityasamutpada known as shunyata and calls its central figure Shakyamuni. This sect designates opposing sects that hold older beliefs by a name meaning \"Lesser Vehicle\" that sounds similar to this sect's name, which means \"Greater Vehicle.\" Some figures to this sect express karuna, or compassion, to unlock the bodhicittot-pada, or awakening potential in the unenlightened. For 10 points, name this sect Buddhism that has bodhisattvas.", "Mahayana", "H"]
["One teacher in this religion is disciplined disciples by \"shouting and hitting\" them with a fly-whisk, and another teacher was a major advocate of the practice of shikantaza. This belief system holds sacred an event in which a man sat silently holding a white lotus, known as the Flower Sermon. In addition to the writings of Linji and Dogen, a sacred instrument to the Fuke form of this religion is the flute-like shakuhachi; playing a single note upon it can lead to this religion's enlightenment called satori. For 10 points, name this sect of Mahayana Buddhism known for its use of extensive meditation and paradoxical riddles called koans that is quite popular in Japan.", "Zen", "H"]
["This group believes that the Lataif-as-Sitta, or Six Subtleties, relate to extra-sensory perception and must be present in order to be a full human. Members of this group advocate total adherence to God, tawakkul, and aspire to reach the state of self-annihilation and union with God, fana and baqa. A branch of this sect practices qawwali, the reaching God through music, and another branch practices a variation with motion, the whirling dervishes. Named for their traditional rough, woolen robes and concentrating on discovering the ultimate love of god through personal experience, for 10 points, identify this mystical branch of Islam.", "Sufism", "H"]
["In one section, this work's author indignantly asks \"Don't we have the right to take a wife?\", while another section sees the author appalled at men living with their fathers' wives. This work is marked by such helpful advice as to \"eat whatever is put before you,\" giving believers the right to eat food sacrificed to idols. Other passages in this work see the author commenting that it is \"disgraceful\" for women to speak in church, as well as a passage in the thirteenth chapter that describes a certain concept as \"patient and kind.\" For 10 points, name this Pauline epistle, famous for its passage on \"love,\" written to the titular residents of a former Greek city-state.", "First Epistle to the Corinthians", "H"]
["Initiates to this belief system wear ilekes and are made part of a house of the Godparents, or ile. Adherents of this system can be possessed by spirits in the \"Mounting of the Horse\" during a drum party, or bembe. Followers attempt to influence their lives through ancestor spirits, or egun. One figure in this religion alternates between a divine policeman and a divine protector, Elegba, and its creator figure is named Olodumare. Believers offer fruit and candles, and sacrifice small animals like chickens, to appease its personifications of natural forces, or orishas. A mixture of Catholic and Yoruba beliefs, for 10 points, name this syncretic Caribbean religion", "Santer\u00eda", "M"]
["One scholar of this faith turned down a civil service position by comparing himself to a sacred turtle that would be better off dragging its tail through the mud than having its bones venerated. That scholar was Zhuangzi, and deities of this faith include the Three Purities, among who is the Jade Emperor, and the Eight Immortals. Concepts important to this religion include ch'i, de, or power, and wu wei, action through inaction, and the yin-yang is associated with it. For 10 points, name this Chinese religion whose text, translated \"The Way and its Power,\" is attributed to its founder, Laozi.", "Taoism", "M"]
["This book contains the eunuch Hegai, in charge of the king's harem at Susa, as well as seven others including Zethar and Carcas who carry an order refused by the queen. Marsena is among those who suggest that Vashti be replaced, and an edict is issued when the husband of Zeresh is not properly honored with the date for a massacre chosen by lot. The namesake of this book persuades Ahasuerus to allow Mordecai to issue an edict opposing that of Haman. For 10 points, name this book whose namesake is a Jewish queen and which contains the basis of Purim.", "Book of Esther", "M"]
["This religion's greatest ceremony, the Great Purification, occurs in June and December and includes the waving of a purification wand over the people, who give penalty offerings. Many of its ceremonial prayers are found in the Engi-shiki. A sacred object known as a shintai is located inside the hondon of this religion's temples, and a gateway called a torii leads to the outer shrine of those temples. Its shrine at Ise is torn down and rebuilt every twenty years. Until 1945 it was a mandatory state religion, and kami are worshipped in it. For 10 points, name this traditional Japanese religion.", "Shinto", "M"]
["This man wrote the Proposal Concerning Images and the Mass explaining his opposition to icons. After his death, Heinrich Bullinger consolidated and legitimized his teachings. Cities converted to his beliefs fought the Catholic Five States in the Kappel Wars. This man believed there was no specific scriptural basis for adult baptism, opposing the Anabaptists. He believed the Eucharist was merely symbolic, causing him to oppose Luther at the Marburg Colloquy. His views were attacked by the Catholics in the Zurich Disputations, after he had begun converting that city. For 10 points, name this Swiss Protestant reformer.", "Huldrych Zwingli", "M"]
["This belief system holds that partial knowledge is attainable through different viewpoints called naya and that souls are initially omniscient but restrained by karma. Among the tenets of this religion are asteya, not taking that which is not given, and satya, truth. Forgiveness can be sought through samayik and the concepts of dharma and adharma allow movement and rest. Samvara is a cessation of the accumulation of karma, and the 24 Tirthankaras acquired all knowledge. Sects of this religion include the sky-clad Digambaras and white-clad Svetambaras, both of which practice ahimsa, or non-violence. For 10 points, name this religion whose adherents follow the teachings of Mahavira.", "Jainism", "M"]
["One law book of this religion is the Laws of Manu, which includes descriptions of its shraddha rites. One system of its philosophy was founded by Kapila and features a dualistic universe in which both prakriti and purusha are real. Besides the Samkhya, another system uses positions called asanas. One of the four acceptable goals of life in it is Artha, or power and wealth. One unknowable concept in this religion is called Nirguna and can only be described negatively. This religion includes the concept of samsara, whose escape, called moksha, is dependent on good karma. For 10 points, name this Indian religion.", "Hinduism", "M"]
["This region's early animistic religion was known as Bon, and the people of this region continued to worship the mother goddess Tara as a new religion grew. The doctrine of Kalachakra concerns time and space and is important to both sects of that new religion. The monks of the Gelugpa sect of Buddhism in this region practice celibacy and wear red hats, while the Nyingmapa Buddhists wear red hats and take part in tantric rituals. This region's spiritual leader is replaced with a child born shortly after his death and viewed as a living Buddha. For 10 points, name this region whose spiritual leader is the Dalai Lama.", "Tibet", "M"]
["One of the men involved in authenticating these was al-Hajjaj, and those that have been discredited are called fawdu. One concept partially derived from these is the sunnah and two collections of them were compiled by Malik and Hanbal. Authenticated ones are called sahih and found in the collection by Bukhari, among others including the rest of the al-kutub as-sitta. Those whose initial source is God are called Qudsi, and these sayings influenced sharia. For 10 points, name these collections of deeds or sayings of the prophet Muhammad.", "Hadith", "M"]
["This religion uses symbols called \"veves\" drawn on the floor with powder to represent its deities. Male officiators at its rites are called hungans, and females are called mambos. Its spirits are arranged in families such as the Ezili and Guede. One of its spirits consorts with Maman Brigitte and loves smoking cigars. The deities of this religion are called loas, and include such examples as Baron Samedi and Papa Legba, the first loa to be invoked in a ceremony. For 10 points, name this syncretic religion of Haiti, often associated with zombies and namesake dolls.", "Voodoo", "M"]
["Although this man unsuccessfully attempted to convert the Sultan of Egypt, his followers were given the post of Custodians of the Holy Land. His order would be protected by Cardinal Ugolino in his absence and supported by Bishop Guido. While on the mountain of La Verna, he received the stigmata. This man's poverty-centered Rule was unofficially accepted by Innocent III, and he supported the formation of the Poor Clares. He wrote the Canticle of the Sun and is the patron saint of animals. For 10 points, name this Catholic saint who founded a monastic order and lived in Italy.", "Francis of Assisi", "M"]
["Prayers said during this festival include the ushpizin, and on the final day of this holiday, seven circuits are made around the synagogue. Like Passover, most of its days are called Chol Ha-Mo'ed and feature relaxed restrictions. Just after it are the holidays of Shemini Atzeret and Simchat Torah. Observers of this festival use the \"Four Species\" of plants during the Hallel prayer. It begins on the 15th of Tishri, and during it, participants dwell inside a small hut with two-and-a-half of the walls covered. For 10 points, name this Jewish harvest festival, also called the Festival of Booths.", "Sukkot", "M"]
["This belief system includes crossing over the Chinvat Bridge after death, which is why dead believers are often placed on rocks to be eaten by vultures. This religion's belief in the afterlife can be found in their holy scriptures, which contain the Gathas. Believers are called asha, meaning \"truth\"; and nonbelievers are called druj, meaning \"lies\". The holy text of this faith is called the Avesta, and speaks of their chief god, a son of Zurvan. That creator battles to overcome the evil spirits known as daeva. Name this religion, centering on the eternal struggle between the evil Ahriman and the good Ahura Mazda, started by the Persian prophet Zarathustra.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["At one point, this figure confronts Peter about his reluctance to eat a meal with Gentiles. This man was also notable for preaching openly for Barnabus, and for making five separate trips to Jerusalem. In one of his writings, he noted the importance of \"faith, hope, and love\", but that \"the greatest of these is love\", and he had earlier had a conversion experience while on the road to Damascus. Name this former tax collector, a figure of the New Testament who wrote several of its books in epistle form, including Titus, Ephesians, and First and Second Corinthians.", "Paul the Apostle", "M"]
["Some practitioners of this rite use the practice of metsitsah b'peh, and the main tool used is called an izmel. Some sects add the participation of a kvatter, and all involve a sandek to accompany the central figure of this ritual, which is followed up twenty-three days later with a pidyon ha-ben, and originated with an act Abraham was ordered to perform on himself at the age of ninety-nine, as well as on his sons Ishmael and Isaac. Its Islamic analogue is the khatna. Performed by a mohel (MOIL) and taking place eight days after the birth of a boy, name this Jewish rite of circumcision.", "Brit milah", "M"]
["One of this man's sons raped his own half-sister, Tamar; that was Amnon, who was subsequently put to death by servants under the command of one of this man's other sons. He was confronted by Nathan about the sinful way he gained one of his wives involving the murder of Uriah. Saul unsuccessfully sabotaged this man's relationship with his friend Jonathan, and his namesake \"shield\" is a hexagram. Descended from Ruth, name this king who supposedly wrote most of the Psalms, married Bathsheba with whom he fathered Solomon, and conquered Goliath.", "David", "M"]
["This Christian sect adopted a Book of Common Prayer with revised liturgy so that its clergy would not be guilty of treason; this was done at its 1789 founding in Philadelphia. Headed today by Presiding Bishop Katharine Jefferts Schori, its services always include a prayer for the Archbishop of Canterbury, since it is part of the Anglican Communion with the Church of England. It uses a symbol of a shield with the Cross of St. George and a smaller Cross of St. Andrew in its canton, since its succession of bishops can be traced to both England and Scotland. Identify this American Christian sect.", "Episcopal Church", "H"]
["This figure appeared in the sanctuary at Naioth late in life, and controversy derives from the pro-monarchic and antimonarchic passages relating to him. This figure predicted the fall of the house of Eli, and he retired from his position after a campaign against the Ammonites. He rejected his first protege over failure to enforce the law of the ban against the Amalekites, and he rejected that man a third time after the witch of Endor conjured up this man's spirit. For 10 points, name this prophet who anointed both Saul and David to become king of Israel.", "Samuel", "H"]
["One important symbol of this religion is the nine-pointed star containing the \"Greatest Name.\" Their calendar consists of nineteen months, each with nineteen days, with an extra four to five so-called \"Days of Ha.\" This faith's most prominent text is the Kitab-i-Aqdas, and Shoghi Effendi was appointed successor to its line until the Universal House of Justice could be formed. It was founded by a Persian nobleman who assumed a name from the Arabic for \"door,\" the Baab. For 10 points, name this religion that praises one of its earliest adherents, the Baha'ullah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["In one tradition, a chair is left empty for this figure at circumcision rituals. He revived the dead child of the widow who was caring for him, and he later embarrassed King Ahab and the prophets of Baal when the fires of Yahweh set alight an offering he had ordered to be doused with water. After this confrontation, he left his mantle with his successor Elisha and was borne into the heavens by a chariot of fire. For 10 points, identify this biblical prophet who will portend the coming of the messiah and for whom Jews pour an extra cup of wine on Passover.", "Elijah", "H"]
["This concept involves removing one's avidia, and its name may come from the Sanskrit for \"blowing off one's stench.\" It is thought to have as many as seven names, one of which is \"amala-consciousness.\" In Jainism, it occurs after the death of an Arhat, though it is thought of as occurring for bhikshus as well in other religions. To Hindus, this is associated with moksha, and it is when one reaches this state that both dukkha and samsara cease. For 10 points, identify this Buddhist concept, the liberation from the cycle of rebirth.", "Nirvana", "H"]
["Some claim that this book's chapters 24 to 34 describe an idealized King Hezekiah, and the canonical theory of its authorship holds that its middle part was written around the end of the Babylonian Captivity, from which, the section called the \"Book of Comfort\" attests, the Jews will be delivered by Cyrus. Its chapters forty-two to fifty-three introduce a character intended to restore Israel, who \"will bring forth justice to the nations,\" the \"servant,\" and this book contains four \"servant songs.\" For 10 points, identify this book of prophesy that precedes Jeremiah, a book foretelling the majesty of Zion, written by a prophet who was later sawn in half.", "Book of Isaiah", "H"]
["After failing to stop this figure at the Ladon River near Mount Lycaeus, another character stated \"this much I have!\" This companion of the Nymphs worked as a goatherd and was promised that all the goats under her care would bear twins by the one who sought her favor. That figure later symbolized the inequality of their love with the unequal lengths of the object named for her. During her flight from that pursuing god, she was swallowed by the Earth. For 10 points, name this figure whose spot of disappearance sprouted a bundle of reeds; a maiden pursued by Pan who lends her name to the instrument that Pan created out of the reeds.", "Syrinx", "H"]
["Bezalel made the first one and shaped parts of it to resemble blossoming flowers. On Mount Sinai, Moses was told to make this out of a single piece of gold, with an elevated center to symbolize the Sabbath. Five of them were on each side of the entrance to the sanctuary in the Temple of Solomon. The last one was apparently lost before a reproduction was displayed on the Arch of Titus. A similar object is used during the month of Kislev and has a place for a \"shamash.\" For 10 points, identify this symbol of Judaism, an eight-branched version of which is used during Hannukah.", "Menorah", "H"]
["This figure's brother wields a hal, or plowshare, as a weapon and killed the donkey-demon Asuradhenuka as a child. This younger brother of Balaram was the eighth child of Devaki, whose first six sons were killed by the tyrant Kamsa. He was adopted by Yasoda and Nanda and began playing the flute for such figures as Radha, one of the gopis, or milkmaids, who followed him. He is incarnated immediately after Buddha in the sequence of avatars. For 10 points, name this figure who went on to drive the chariot for Arjuna in the Mahabharata, in which role he delivers the Bhagavad-Gita, and is an avatar of Vishnu usually shown with blue skin.", "Krishna", "H"]
["Ernst Sellin's theory that this figure was murdered at Shittim features in a book that claims that he was a priest of Akhenaton. This figure sweetened the waters of Marah by throwing a tree into it, and his sister was stricken with leprosy after his wife was accused of being Ethiopian. He married that wife after defeating shepherds at a well, earning the good will of Jethro. For 10 points, name this Biblical figure, the husband of Zipporah whose brother erected a Golden Calf, noted for being a Red Sea parter, Burning Bush communicator, and Ten Commandments receiver.", "Moses", "H"]
["Its name comes from a word meaning \"intense heat,\" and it was during this time that the Battle of Badr took place. It is recommended that a single juz [JOOZ] be read each day, and other daily traditions during this holiday include the morning suhoor and nightly iftaar. Towards the end of this time is a day which is better than 1000 months, the Lailat al-Qadr or \"Night of Power.\" It is during this period that the practice of sawm is observed, though it is prohibited on its last day, Eid [EED] al-Fitr. For 10 points, name this Islamic holy month during which able Muslims fast.", "Ramadan", "H"]
["A cosmological text to this religion is the Bundahishn, while the Yashts are hymns that address deities like Anahita. The primal man Gayomart was conceived as an image in the sky in this faith, while a heresy in it instituted the belief in an omnipresent god who created the gods of light and darkness, Zurvan. In this religion, the dead are placed in \"Towers of Silence,\" or Dakhmas, and this religion's major god is conflictingly believed to have created his nemesis Ahriman. For 10 points, name this Persian religion that follows the Zend-Avesta and worships Ahura Mazda, named for its prophet.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["This man is never mentioned after sailing off to Cyprus in Acts, and Paul requested St. Timothy to bring this man to him. He is attributed with founding the Egyptian church, and Alexandria's see is named for him. He is referred to as \"my son\" by Peter, and he may be the cousin of Barnabas, who he traveled to Antioch with before causing Barnabas and Paul to separate. He is the patron saint of Venice and namesake of their Cathedral. For 10 points, name this disciple of Jesus's, who is the attributed author of the second synoptic gospel.", "Mark the Evangelist", "H"]
["This religion has no official website, but propagates itself through ClearWisdom.com and anonymous CD-ROM drops in mailboxes. This faith arose from the so-called \"qigong boom\" of traditional cultivation practices. This religion rejects modern medicine and believes that world history since 1900 is a lie perpetuated by aliens. Members allege that its adherents have been subject to organ harvesting in this religion's native country, and it gained attention when one of its members set himself on fire in Tiananmen Square. For 10 points, name this religion founded in 1992 by Li Hongzhi, which is repressed by the government of the People's Republic of China.", "the Falun Gong ", "M"]
["The Quartodecimans, mostly in Asia Minor, argued for a different date for this holiday, but mostly died out after Pope Victor disagreed. The Council of Nicaea agreed with the earlier Council of Arles that all Christians should celebrate it on the same day. Converts to the Catholic church are baptized and confirmed during this holiday's vigil. Its season extends either 40 days to Ascension Day or 50 days to Pentecost, and it ends the period of Lent. Strongly tied to the Jewish Passover, for 10 points, name this Christian holiday which occurs two days after Good Friday, a spring festival which celebrates the resurrection of Jesus with objects like painted eggs.", "Easter", "M"]
["Orthodox Jews believe that this figure was one of the Pharaoh's advisers in Exodus, where he remained silent despite opposing the Pharaoh's intentions to kill new-born Hebrew males. He deems his wife's only line in the bible nonsense, and Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar sit by him for seven days and seven nights until he curses the night on which he was conceived, at which point they begin talking about how he must have sinned to have been punished by God, but Elihu enters and argues for God's absolute rightness. For 10 points, name this man, whom Satan causes to lose his fortune and children while getting boils in a test of piety by God, the namesake of a book in the Bible.", "Job", "M"]
["An analogous event to baptism in this religion involves reciting the five Banis and drinking water and sugar stirred in an iron bowl. The continuous reading of its holy text, lasting about 48 hours, is the Akhand Path; with hymns Japji and Mul Mantra, that text was compiled by Arjan. The founder of this religion, followed by Bhai Gurdas, was inspired by his three days in the river Bein. Its most important shrine, attacked in Operation Blue Star, is Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar, and most of its 23 million followers are concentrated in Punjab. For 10 points, name this religion whose holy text is the Adi Granth, founded by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "M"]
["His father Haran was burned to death in a fire by the builder of the Tower of Babel, Nimrod. He gets captured by Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and is saved when 318 men defeat that king at Damascus. In a cave of the mountains next to Zoar, he fathered Moab and Ammon, and proceeded to become the patriarch of both the Moabites and the Ammonites. He supposedly offered his daughters to a mob demanding to see angels that he had given refuge to, resulting in his eventual survival of catastrophe. For 10 points, name this nephew of Abraham, whose wife Irit was turned to stone for looking back while the family escaped the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.", "Lot", "M"]
["This man tried to defend against his death at the hands of a mob with a pepper pistol but was shot in jail. He and his 10,000 followers were forced out of Missouri and into Illinois during a war that saw the death of 22 people in 1838. In 1827, he married Emma Hale, and in 1831 he tried to move his followers to Independence, Missouri. He established the city of Nauvoo in Illinois, which was the site of another war in 1844. This caused his followers to again move, this time to the West, where later they would perpetrate the Mountain Meadows Massacre. For 10 points, name this man who supposedly met Moroni, the first leader of the Church of Latter Day Saints.", "Joseph Smith", "M"]
["So-called human-jaguar copulation scenes can be found in the art of this people. A sacred bog in El Manati provides evidence of child sacrifice and also yielded figurines in this civilization's \"elongated man\" style, while stelae found in La Venta possibly indicate that site as a ceremonial center of the San Lorenzo phase, placed in the Early Formative Period. Depictions of these people are reminiscent of African or Chinese physiognomy, causing much speculation about these people's origins, who suddenly disappeared around 400 BCE. For 10 points, name this early Mesoamerican civilization most famous for 17 colossal stone heads carved from basalt.", "Olmec", "M"]
["Central notions of this group include marifa, while the hadarat are the levels of tajalliat and baqaa. Members hope to achieve fana, or self-annihilation, and muraqaba is used to acquaint oneself with the Six Subtleties. They are organized into tariqas, examples of which include the Chishti and Mevlevi. Famous exponents include the author of the Masnavi who founded the Mevlevi Order, Rumi, and in their search for love initiates are called dervishes. Taking their name from their wool clothing, for 10 points, name this mystical sect of Islam.", "Sufism", "M"]
["The predecessor of this religion was organized under the eighteen Letters of the Living, and its membership grew greatly during the Ten Year Crusade. The founder of this religion organized at the Garden of Ridvan and claimed to be a Manifestation of God before he denounced his critic in \"Epistle to the Son of the Wolf,\" while more recently, it was defended by its first and last Guardian, Shoghi Effendi. The Seven Valleys and Kitab-i-Aqdas are important in this religion, whose central belief is the unity of religion and mankind. The Book of Certitude is another key text of, for 10 points, what syncretic religion based on Babism, founded by Baha'u'llah?", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "H"]
["The pagan religion of this tribe was mediated by shamanistic figures known as taltos. The river Chidmas flew through their quasi-legendary homeland of Levedia. Figures from their mythology include the shape-shifting demon Ordog and little people known as manok. Hadur was this tribe's god of both copper smithing and war. Rulers of this tribe claimed descent from Turul, a magical falcon, and their leader Geza was converted to Christianity by St. Adalbert at Esztergom. For ten points, name this Central Asian tribe whose first Christian king was Stephen, and whose language is related to Finnish.", "Hungarians", "H"]
["This group is associated with Haplogroup J1, which is disproportionately found among them. In one ceremony, these people receive five pieces of silver after the birth of a first son. These people wore the Avnet sash, as well as the Ketonet, a ceremonial tunic, while performing the ceremony of Korbanot. The leader of this group wore the Tzitz crown, as well as a larger Mitznefet turban, and was called the Gadol. Members of this group may not come into contact with the dead, and they make a special gesture with their fingers when performing blessings. For ten points, name this class of hereditary Jewish priests who performed sacrifices in the Temple.", "Kohen", "H"]
["Curious lines in this text include \"I renounce the theft and robbery of the cow\". The final lines of this text are sometimes separately recited at the end of the kusti prayer ritual. The speaker of this text rejects the yatu demons, and one figure praised in this text is called khwarena-possessing, referring to a mythical fiery luster. The speaker of this text vows to follow in the footsteps of Jamaspa and Frashaostra, while the first to recite this text may have been King Vishtaspa. This text's name translates as \"I choose\", and it is found at Yasna 12. It begins \"I declare myself a Mazda-worshipper\". For ten points, name this creed of the Zoroastrian faith.", "Ashem Vohu", "H"]
["Ten thousand Brahmans cut their hair and took vows after this man correctly predicted that the limbs of Asuras would drop from the heavens. He had earlier spent ninety days studying at the bottom of the sea in the palace of the King of the Dragons. He began his study of the Pitakas after getting three companions killed by sneaking into a harem. He refuted the Sarvastivada and Sautrantika schools and revived the catuskoti or method of \"four errors\", while Santaraksita attempted to integrate this man's thought with that of Dign?ga and Dharmak?rti. He claimed there was no difference between samsara and nirvana, and addressed his The End of Disputes to the burgeoning Nyaya school. He posited everything was characterized by sunyata or emptiness in his Fundamental Verses on the Middle Way. For 10 points, name this Indian Buddhist, the founder of the Madhyamaka school.", "Nagarjuna", "H"]
["This denomination rejects the idea that the wicked dead are punished in Hell, instead holding that those not saved and resurrected by God will simply cease to exist, a fate they term the \"common grave\". This denomination traces its origin to the Bible Students movement led by Charles Russell. They interpret Old Testament references to \"the Word\" or Archangel Michael to be references to pre-incarnation Christ. Since this denomination holds that Christ was a creation of God, they are non-Nicean and anti-Trinitarian. This denomination trains its missionaries at the Gilead School and its adherents meet at Kingdom Halls, and they interpret a Biblical prohibition on eating blood to apply to transfusions as well. For ten points, name this Christian denomination perhaps most notable for door-to-door proselytizing.", "Jehovah's Witnesses", "H"]
["This structure's name may derive from a phrase meaning \"bird perch\", while a three-legged triangular version of this structure may have been built by crypto-Christians. Parts of this structure include the nuki and the kasagi. One of the most famous of these structures is described as \"floating\" because it is partially submerged at high tide. Those who are menstruating, have lost a relative, or are otherwise ritually unclean may not pass through this structure, which separates the profane exterior from the sacred interior. For ten points, name this gate to a Shinto temple.", "Torii", "H"]
["This practice is limited by the concept of nisab, and like the similar practice of Khums this practice was once overseen by the Bayt al-mal. A special form of this practice performed only once a year is named for Eid al-Fitr and takes place after fasting. This practice's name translates as \"to grow\", and it is contrasted with the similar Sadaqa, which is voluntary. The dead, descendents of the Prophet Muhammad, and non-Muslims are not allowed to benefit from this practice, nor is it required if one's harvest is modest. For ten points, name this Pillar of Islam that involves giving to the poor.", "Zakat", "H"]
["The thunder god of this ethnic group was named Taranis, and was depicted with a wheel. The agriculture god of this ethnic group was depicted as a bearded man holding a hammer. Apart from Sucellus, they worshipped the healing god Belenus, the war god Camulus and the horse goddess Epona. This ethnic group is associated with the La Tene and Hallstatt cultures, and they established Galatia in Asia Minor. Their languages are divided into Continental and Insular or P and Q families. For ten points, name this West European ethnic group that includes the Breton, the Gauls, and the Irish.", "Celts", "H"]
["In Japan, a form of this practice was termed Hitobashira. This practice was the culmination of the Morning Star ritual among the Pawnee. At a statue with downward sloping palms, the Carthaginians allegedly engaged in this practice and, according to the Book of Jeremiah, Tophet was where the Phoenicians engaged in this practice. The Celts allegedly engaged in this practice by use of a wicker man, and allegations that one group engages in this practice is termed the Blood Libel. For ten points, name this practice widely engaged in by the Aztecs, and which resulted in the death of Iphigeneia.", "Human sacrifice", "H"]
["This holiday was once the first day on which the Bikkurim ceremony could be performed, wherein the seven species would be brought to the temple. The Akdamut, a poem by Rabbi Meir of Worms, is read during this holiday, on which dairy products are consumed and the Book of Ruth is read. This holiday occurs sixteen days after a holiday on which hair is cut and it marks the end of Omer. It is one of the three pilgrimage festivals along with Pesach and Sukkot. For ten points name this Jewish holiday that celebrates the giving of the Torah to Moses, which falls on the same day as Pentecost and is known as the Feast of Weeks.", "Shavuot", "H"]
["One resident of this city wrote a treatise on love called \"The Ring of the Dove\". Apart from Ibn Hazm, other thinkers native to this city include the Maliki scholar al-Qurtubi, who wrote a notable twelve-volume commentary on the Koran, and a Jewish mystic nicknamed \"the Ramak\". The largest mosque in this city was built on the former spot of St. Vincent's Church and is notable for its over 1,000 non-matching columns, which were scavenged from Roman ruins. That mosque is known as the \"Mezquita\". A man nicknamed \"The Falcon of the Quayresh\", Abd al-Rahman I, established a caliphate based in this city after being driven out of the Middle East by the Abbasids, who had overthrown his Umayyad relatives. For ten points, name this capital city of Islamic Spain, also the surname of a certain Esteban.", "C\u00f3rdoba", "H"]
["Supporters of this Christian practice cite Numbers 21:4-9, claiming that the use of Nehushtan by Moses is analogous to this practice, which was notably defended by St. Tarasius. This practice is linked to the legend of the Holy Mandylion, as well as to the phenomenon of Acheiropoieta. Condemned at the Council of Hirea, the Second Council of Nicea re-affirmed this practice, which supporters also justify by arguing that the incarnation of Christ made God visible. For ten points, name this primarily Eastern Orthodox practice of paying respect to depictions of holy figures.", "Iconodule", "H"]
["In India, a type of this vestment known as the taanka was once worn by rajputs to denote their status, while in Mysore an article of this type is known as a peta. This article of clothing is transferred from one wearer to another during the Rasam Pagri ceremony. Ways of donning this article include Amamah and Dastar, and during pilgrimages a green version of this vestment is often worn. In one faith, the rule of kesh often leads to followers donning this article of clothing to fulfill one of the five k's. For ten points, name this headgear often worn by Sikhs and Muslims, which consists of a cloth wrapped around the head.", "Turban", "H"]
["This book claimed that Noah spent 950 years \"prayerfully exhorting\" his people to not sin, and it uses the example of the changing of the Qibla to claim that God often destroys old habits to test faith, and it divides religious rules into groups named for things in the sky, such as the sun, moon, stars, and clouds. This text's introduction calls for its followers to give up all that is earthly and tread the path of faith in order to attain the shore of true understanding, and part of this book is called the \"Tablet of the Truth Seeker\". This book discusses the multiple Manifestations of God, as seen in the succession of Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Muhammad, and finally the Bab. For ten points, name this book by Baha'ullah, the primary theological text of the Baha'i faith.", "The Book of Certitude ", "H"]
["St. Paul allegedly engages in this activity in Second Timothy for the benefit of Onesiphorus, while Judas Machabeus engaged in this practice on behalf of comrades who had been found with idols of Jamnia. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, this practice is associated with Koliva, a type of ceremonial bread, and takes place at a special church service called the Panikhida. A person for whose benefit this practice is done may be listed as a diptych during Mass, and evidence that early Christians engaged in this activity includes monumental inscriptions left in Catacombs. Catholics often engage in this practice on behalf of a relative in Purgatory. For ten points, name this practice that Jews might perform by saying Kaddish.", "Prayer for the dead", "H"]
["One hadith about this rule condemns the use of reeds as tools. Issues not directly addressed by this rule are deemed \"mubah\", while the term \"makruh\" describes practices not formally condemned by this rule but still discouraged. Improper application of this rule is termed the sin of Istihlal. This rule requires the ritual of Dhabiha and all that violates this rule is deemed haram. Requiring the severing of the carotid and jugular and subsequent death by bleeding, for ten points name this set of Muslim dietary rules specifying what food may or may not be eaten.", "Halal", "H"]
["The two attendants Yaksha and Yakshini look after the needs of these figures. Two of them are always artistically depicted with cobra hoods over their heads, while all others are depicted in the Kayotsarga posture with their right hand over their left lap. The gender of one of these people, Mallinath, is disputed. Each is smaller than the one that came before him, with the oldest, Rishabha, or Lord Bull, being 1,500 meters tall and living billions of years ago. With a name meaning \"ford makers\" and numbering twenty-four in total ending with Mahavira, for ten points name these holy figures from Jainism.", "Tirthankara", "H"]
["According to one account, this object was brought to Sena by the Buba tribe, after which it was placed on the Dumghe mountains. In the Koran, this object is described as bringing \"Sakina\", or the peace of God. This object was once protected by the parochet and was wrapped in tachash skin, and it caused the cities of Gath, Ekron, and Ashdod to suffer plagues of hemorrhoids and mice. A statue of Dagon was found prostrate and broken near this object after this object was captured at the Battle of Ebenezer. Jeremiah may have buried this object on Mt. Nebo before Nebuchadnezzar sacked the First Temple, in whose Holy of Holies it was. For ten points, name this box that contained the Ten Commandments.", "Ark of the Covenant", "H"]
["Samuel Zasadius was expelled from Poland for attempting to spread this religion, which John Honterus introduced to Transylvania. More radical forms of this Christian denomination were advocated by Andreas Karlstadt, a colleague of this faith's early leaders, and by Phillip Spener, who stressed mysticism. In one country, this religion was adopted because of the unpopularity of the Catholic Archbishop Trolle, and its sub-groups include the Pietists. This faith's doctrine of \"Sacramental Union\", which affirms the Real Presence while rejecting Transubstantiation, is sometimes called Consubstantiation. Heeding the Augsburg Confession, for ten points name this Protestant denomination originating from the 95 theses of its namesake German founder.", "Lutheranism", "H"]
["The concept of Hit Bononut was developed by a sub-group of this movement. Important texts in this movement include the Sefat Emet, the Shabbos of Gershom Scholem, and the Tanya. This movement, whose members include Shneur Zalman, believes that God is present in all things, a form of pantheism, and opponents of this movement are called misnagdim. This movement was founded by Baal Shem Tov, and groups within it include the Lubavitch or Chabad, who are based in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. For ten points, name this mystical movement within Haredi and Orthodox Judaism that stresses piety.", "Hasidic Judaism", "H"]
["This man first befriended and then condemned the rogue Spanish theologian Michael Servetus, who was eventually burned at the stake for disagreeing with this man. This thinker drafted the \"Consensus Tigurinus\", a memorandum addressing the doctrine of the Real Presence, by which this man hoped to unite his movement with that of fellow reformer Heinrich Bullinger. This man's views were defended by his student Theodore Beza at the Council of Dort, where they were attacked by Jakob Hermann, also called Arminius. Total Depravity is one of the \"Five Points\" of this man's theology, which he summated in Institutes of the Christian Religion. For ten points, name this Geneva-based founder of a branch of Christianity that believes in predestination.", "John Calvin", "H"]
["One of this man's genetic descendants founded the Udasi, an ascetic sect that does not follow some of the rules set down by this man, and one legend about this man says that when he was a child, a venomous cobra shielded him from the sun. Biographies of this man are known as the Vars or Janamsakhis and were written by such men as Bhai Bala and Bhai Gurdas. This man set forth principle of Naam Japna, or worship of God, which forms one of his three pillars alongside making an honest living and sharing with others. This man's followers worship in gudwaras and follow the Five K's. For ten points, name this first guru and founder of Sikhism.", "Guru Nanak", "H"]
["According to legend, this man once freed a ghost by teaching a dead man's son to read the Torah, and this man once spent twelve years away from his wife to study with Eliezer ben Hyrkanus. Proclamations by this man include \"What God does, he does for the best\", and he claimed that the Messianic Age would last for 40 years, or one man's lifetime. This man often disputed with Patriarch Gamaliel II and was nicknamed the \"Head of all the Sages\". Allegedly illiterate until age 40, this man once stated that \"a star has shot off Jacob\", setting in motion a series of political events that resulted in the diaspora. For ten points, name this second century Rabbi who helped spark a 132 rebellion against Roman rule when he proclaimed that Simon Bar Kokba was the messiah.", "Akiva ben Joseph", "H"]
["Children in this ethnic group believe in Olentzero, who brings them presents on Christmas Eve, while Illargi or Ilazki was the moon goddess in the pagan religion of this ethnic group. They erected stelae known as \"Hilarri\", and they credited the wild man Basajaun, a cave spirit, with teaching them agriculture and ironworking. Their great serpent god, Sugaar, had his abode on this people's sacred Anboto Mountain, which was more notably home to Mari, their great mother goddess. They won the Battle of Roncesvalles Pass, where they slew Roland. For ten points, name this non-Indo-European speaking ethnic group of northern Spain.", "Basques", "H"]
["Late in his life, this man wrote the \"Book of Names\" and the \"Book of Five Grades\", but he more notably wrote two texts in two different languages called the \"Bayans\". The authority of this man was first recognized by members of the Shaykhi movement, specifically Siyyid Kazim and Mulla Husayn, and other followers of this man started the Nayriz and Zanjan uprisings. A text titled \"Gems of Divine Mysteries\" explains how this man was the Mahdi, and he is also considered Elijah and John the Baptist. He adopted a name meaning \"the gate\" and foretold the messianic coming of a Promised One, who turned out to be one of his followers. For ten points, name this first major figure of the Bahai faith, the predecessor of Baha'ullah.", "B\u00e1b", "H"]
["One mosque in this city boasts the al-Fakhariyya and Ghawanima minarets. This city is home to a shrine dedicated to a chain between heaven and earth. In pre-Muslim times this city was ruled by Sophronius, who surrendered it to the Caliph Umar, and this city contains the Gate of the Cotton Merchants near an octagonal shrine. Al-Buraq transported Muhammad to this city during the Night Journey, after which Muhammad ascended into heaven. For ten points, name this city home to the al-Aqsa Mosque and Dome of the Rock, the third holiest in Islam.", "Jerusalem", "H"]
["Chapter Eight of this man's namesake book quotes another figure as saying that children need no repentance, and thus child baptism is a mockery before God, while Chapter Nine of this man's book is known as the \"Second Epistle\". This man compiled and commented on the history of the Jaredites by writing the Book of Ether, while this man's namesake book contains his namesake promise, which says that after praying to the Holy Spirit one will feel a burning in the bosom. After his death, this figure was resurrected and tasked with guarding items hidden at Cumorah hill in New York. For ten points, name this last major prophet of the Book of Mormon, who appeared to Joseph Smith and showed him the golden plates.", "Moroni", "H"]
["One member of this ethnic group supported individualist anarchy in his book The Ego and Its Own. Another member of this ethnic group wrote the book Treatise on the Origin of Language, which included an early version of the Sapir-Worf hypothesis and urged members of this ethnic group to speak their language rather than French. Apart from Herder, another member of this ethnic group wrote Attempt at a Critique of All Revelation, and this ethnic group included virtually all of the Young Hegelians. For ten points, name this ethnic group whose philosophers include Fichte and Feuerbach, and which lends its name to a country with capital at Berlin.", "Germans", "H"]
["These peoples believe in undead creatures called Mullo, who may rise from the grave to take revenge on those who did not give them proper burial rites. The Butyakengo are protective spirits in this group's forklore, who can be passed on from parents to children. The good god Devla and the evil god Beng are prominent in this group's pagan religion, while Catholic members of this ethnic group especially venerate St. Sarah, to whom they have constructed a shrine in France, and according to Wikipedia this ethnic group believes in Vampire Watermelons in the Balkans. Their use of the word \"thushul\" to mean \"cross\" hints at their origin on the Subcontinent of India. For ten points, name these nomadic peoples of Europe stereotypically associated with fortune telling.", "Romani people", "H"]
["This book opens following the end of the reign of Jehoiakim, and it contains the Prophecy of the Seventy Weeks. In it, a goat horn breaks off and is replaced with four smaller horns, and the story of Bel and the Dragon is sometimes attached to it. One king in this book is tricked into passing a law banning a certain activity for thirty days, while another figure in this work sees an idol made of four different materials destroyed by a large stone. This book describes a fourth figure seen in a fireplace and the miraculous survival of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, as well as the Madness of Nebuchadnezzar and a disembodied hand disrupting Belshazzar's feast. For ten points, name this biblical book, named for a prophet who survived a trip to the lion's den.", "Book of Daniel", "H"]
["The word \"zelem\" is the first of many homonyms in scripture that this book explains in its opening section. This book approves of twenty five proofs of God, but rejects the proposition that the universe is eternal, and it presents a critical analysis of the proofs for the existence and incorporeality of god of the kalam scholars. Its last chapter describes four ways in which man can become perfect, the last of which is attainable only through faith. This book contains scattered references to the Merkhaba, a mystical section of the Book of Ezekiel, and is addressed to Joseph ben Judah, a student of the author. For ten points, name this most notable work of Moses Maimonides, intended for people confused about Judaism.", "The Guide for the Perplexed", "H"]
["One of these texts assures the reader that Christianity is not a \"cunningly designed fable\", using as proof the fact that God's voice was heard during the Ascension. That text also contains a verse warning that if God was willing to punish even his own angels who turned against Him, he would have no problem punishing the recipients of these texts. Another of these texts urges believers to gird the loins of their minds. That text states that it was written by the hand of the scribe Silvanus, also known as St. Silas, who may have been the secretary of the purported author. That text also states that Christ preached the Gospel to the dead and is used to support the doctrine of the Harrowing of Hell. The author of these texts says that he is in \"Babylon\", which has been interpreted as Rome. For ten points, name these two epistolary books of the New Testament, traditionally said to be written by the first Pope.", "Authorship of the Petrine epistles", "H"]
["This religion followed \"Amari\", or the principle of non-violence towards animals, but only during holy days. Fourteen may have been a sacred number in this faith, which had fourteen annual festivals celebrated with Zoroastrian-style fire ceremonies and prostration before a cross. The most important building in this faith was the Ibadat Khana, whose name simply means House of Worship, where the founder of this religion invited members of different religions to discuss and argue. The only surviving description of this religion is found in the Dabistan, or School of Manners, a Persian text that describes every major religion of its time. According to tradition, this faith had only 19 followers, and its founder was rumored to have abandoned it after fire fell from the sky in Lahore, symbolizing Allah's displeasure at a certain royal personage in Agra. For ten points, name this short-lived syncretic religion, founded by the third Mughal Emperor, Akbar the Great.", "Din-i Ilahi", "H"]
["Some members of this religion preface all of their statements with the word \"syad\", or \"maybe\", to demonstrate that reality is complex and thus no statement may be entirely accurate. A central concept of this religion is Anekantavada, or the idea that truth can be approached from multiple viewpoints. Umaswati wrote the major holy text of this faith, called the \"Book of Reality\". Members of this religion follow the \"four restraints\" laid down by Lord Parshva, and both the white-clad and sky-clad - or Svetambara and Digambara - sects of this faith follow the principle of ahimsa. For ten points, name this non-violent religion of India.", "Jainism", "H"]
["Hebrews 11:37 is generally believed to refer to this man, an allusion to the tradition that this man died by being placed inside a log that was cut in half. Chapter 26 of this man's book begins with the \"hymn of the elect\", a song of praise to be sung when the Lord brings salvation. This man urged King Hezekiah to resist the invading Assyrian army of Sennacherib, and this man's mention of a \"servant of Yahweh\" and \"Arm of God\" is interpreted by Christians to prefigure the coming of Jesus. For ten points, name this first of the major prophets, who warns Judah to turn back to God or face destruction.", "Isaiah", "H"]
["These people believe in the veracity of the Abishua Scroll, allegedly written by a great-grandson of Aaron. They believe that Abraham's near-sacrifice of Isaac occurred on Mount Gerizim, which is sacred to them and serves as the main site for their sacrifices. According to the Book of Kings, an epidemic of killer lions forced this group to convert, despite their alleged origin as pagan immigrants settled by the Assyrians, and their aid was refused during the building of the Second Temple. For ten points, name this religious group, whose members claim to be descendants of Jews who were remained in Israel during the Babylonian captivity and who lend their name to the practice of helping strangers.", "Samaritans", "H"]
["An anthropological study of this religion was made by James Mooney. The founder of this religion allegedly had the power to control the weather and received revelations during a solar eclipse. The central belief of this faith was that performing the central ritual at certain intervals over a five day period would result in the resurrection of the dead, and some members of this Wovoka-founded religion believed that magical shirts would protect them from bullets. For ten points, name this millenarian religion practiced by the victims of the Wounded Knee massacre, named for its central dance.", "Ghost Dance", "H"]
["A central ritual of this holiday involves the use of udiyyah or al-qurbani, which may be ritually decorated with plastic jewelry. The day before this holiday, pilgrims are expected to descend from Mount Arafat and seek repentance, an event known as the \"Day of Arafat\". This holiday takes place approximately seventy days after the end of Ramadan during the month of Dhu al-Hijjah, and the primary way of celebrating this holiday is by sacrificing domestic animals, especially rams. For ten points, name this Muslim holiday commemorating the willingness of Ibrahim to sacrifice his son to God.", "Eid al-Adha", "H"]
["Leaders of this movement included the Mozley brothers and the poet John Keble. Edward Pusey's name is sometimes given to this movement, and groups founded from this movement include the Confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament and the Guild of All Souls, a group that meets to practice prayer for the dead. This movement supported by John Newman was advocated in the pamphlet series Tracts for the Times, and is thus also known as the Tractarian movement. For ten points, name this 19th century movement to introduce more Catholic practices into the Church of England, named for a British university.", "Oxford Movement", "H"]
["This man was tutored by the grammarian Aelius Donatus. This man was once driven out of town because he was blamed for the death of Blaesilla, a girl that had become an ascetic after this man criticized her immorality. This man translated the works of Didymus the Blind into Latin and wrote a notable commentary on the Book of Daniel. He defended the eternal virginity of Mary in his Against Jovianius. This man's most famous work came while he served as a secretary to Pope Damasus the Great. For ten points, name this saint who translated the Bible into the Latin of the common people in his Vulgate.", "Jerome", "H"]
["In one story, the central figure of this religion accidentally killed some dancers using bars of gold. Another figure from this religion set out to accomplish a certain number of tasks that would make him invincible, including moving to a colder climate and entering a \"Bowl of Swords\", but failed to accomplish the fifteenth and final task of defeating a certain Chilean. Holy objects from this religion include kumbla, a jar that contains glory, and its scriptures include the lyrical kirtanas, which can be sung to ward off this faith's turbaned trickster figure, the Bactrian camel-riding Charles Meigs. For ten points, name this fake quizbowl religion that worships UPenn student and Brown alumnus Eric Mukherjee.", "Mukherjudaism ", "H"]
["A pseudepigraphical third one of these, considered canonical by the Syriac Orthodox Church,", "Epistles to the Corinthians", "H"]
["During this the tasmiya is recited, followed by threefold takbir and then the turning towards the qibla. Ending at sunset on the third of the ayyam al-tashrik, it requires the use of udiyya or kurbani and was an adoption of an old Arab custom which occurred in the Valley of Mina. Controversially, Saddam Hussein was hung on the first day of this festival and it is the only holiday celebrated by the Druze. Set to occur on November twenty-seventh of 2009, it acknowledges the actions of Abraham and Isaac or Ismail on Mount Moriah. Celebrated on the tenth of Dhul-al-Hidjja, for 10 points, name this Islamic Festival of Sacrifice which concludes the Hajj.", "Eid al-Adha", "H"]
["The Ki Teitzel and Ki Tavo represent two of the weekly reading portions prescribed for this book. Along with the Book of Numbers this text in Chapter twenty-two commands the wearing of twisted threads known as Tzitzit, and some suggest that its primary redaction occurred during the reforms of King Josiah. Chapter two of this notes that Zamzummims, or giants, once existed among the children of Ammon, but God killed them all, and it warns the Israelites not to harm the Ammonites. Chapter Six verse four of this states, \"Hear, O Israel: the Lord is our god, the Lord is one,\" which constitutes the Shema. Known as the Devarim in the Hebrew Bible and with a name derived from the Greek for \"second law,\" for 10 points, name this fifth book of the Old Testament.", "Book of Deuteronomy", "H"]
["Although this ruler's servant Jauhar wrote a biography of him, the most notable account of his life is provided by his sister, Gulbadan Begum. This man's defeat at the battles of Chausa and Kannauj resulted in his flight from India, and during his exile he converted to Shia Islam in exchange for military aid from Shah Tahmasp. With that aid, this man was able to take Kabul from his disloyal half-brother Kamran Mirza, and he defeated the successors of Sher Shah Suri and retook Delhi after appointing Bairam Khan to lead his army. This man is noted for the tomb built for him by his wife Hamida, and after his return from exile he succeeded in reunifying the empire of his father Babur. For 10 points, name this ruler, the second Mughal Emperor and father of Akbar.", "Humayun", "H"]
["Neo-Platonist influences on this sect can be seen in the Epistles of the Brethren of Purity, and most sub-sects of this sect insist upon esoteric or hidden knowledge known as batin as opposed to the exterior meaning known as zahir. One \"migration commune\" of this religion was established in the ninth century. In addition to the now extinct Qarmatians, this sect includes a subgroup that currently reveres Aga Khan IV as the Imam of Time and celebrated his Golden Jubilee in 2007. In 930 members of one subgroup of this sect stole the Black Stone from the Kaaba claiming that the Day of Judgment was at hand, and that subgroup also desecrated the Well of Zamzam with corpses. From the fortress of Alamut in the Alborz Mountains, members of this sect were brainwashed by Hassan-i Sabbah and called Hashshashin until their destruction by Hulagu Khan. Currently divided into the Mustali and Nizari sects, for 10 points, name this sect of Shi'a Islam that takes its name from the son of Ja'far al-Sadiq one major subgroup of which included the Seveners.", "Isma'ilism", "H"]
["In the third book of Athlyi in the Holy Piby, this figure places a crown on a \"natural man\" that been standing before the Angel Douglas. In Bulgarian folk customs, this figure's feast day is known as Ilinden. This figure is given an epithet meaning \"the Thunderer,\" and is the theological successor to the pre-Christian Slav deity Perun. An incident described in First Kings 19 occurring on Mount Horeb is seen as the scriptural justification for the setting aside of his eponymous chair at all brit [bris] milah ceremonies. In the Book of Malachi he is prophesized to return before the end of days, and on Mount Carmel he asked \"How long will you falter between two opinions?\" According to Matthew 17:3, during the Transfiguration this prophet along with Moses appears next to Jesus. For 10 points, name this prophet whose \"zeal for Yahweh\" led him to challenge the Baal apostasy of Jezebel, after which he passed the mantle to Elisha as his successor and was carried up to heaven in a chariot of fire.", "Elijah", "H"]
["The ruler Menander I Soter established his capital at Taxila in this region, and it had earlier been the site of the Battle of the Hydaspes in which its King Porus was defeated by Alexander the Great. A state of this name shares with Haryana its capital, Chandigarh, which was planned by Le Corbusier, and Ludhiana is the largest city of one state by this name. The Beas, Chenab, Jhelum, Ravi and Sutlej are the five rivers which give this region its name, and it is home to Faisalabad, Rawalpindi and Lahore, three of the four largest cities of one country which shares it. This region was the site of Operation Blue Star in 1984, in which Indira Gandhi ordered a strike on the militants in the Golden Temple of its city of Amritsar. For 10 points, name this region along the India-Pakistan border, the birthplace of Sikhism.", "Punjab (region)", "H"]
["Though Saunaka lists five shakhas associated with this text only the Sakala redaction remains extant. A hymn in this work dedicated to the Vishvadevas notes, \"To what is One, sages give many a title...\" is cited as evidence of an emerging monism, as it is found in the later sections of this work linguistically. The role of one of the composers' of this text and his family in the Battle of Ten Kings is the focus of one section, making Vashishta the only other human besides Bhavayavya to have hymn dedicated to him in this work. The tenth verse of the sixty-second hymn from a section in this text, which venerates Savitri, is known as the Gayatri Mantra, and Krishna in Bhagavad Gita equates himself with that verse. The first and last sections of this text are linguistically the youngest, and the first word of this text is Agni. Max Mueller's translation of this text included the edited commentary of Sayana, and it is traditionally split into 10 mandalas. For 10 points, name this oldest of the Hindu Vedas.", "Rigveda", "M"]
["Unique beliefs of this religious group include condoning temporary apostasy in order to avoid being killed, allowing temporary marriages, and a system of exegesis that extrapolates \"other levels of meaning\" from its holy text known as taqwa. The Zaydiyyah are one sect belonging to this group, which is divided into \"twelvers\" and \"seveners\", sometimes called Ismailis. This sect's army lost the battle of Karbala, conceding temporal control to the Umayyads. Having supported Ali as the rightful caliph, for 10 points, name this type of Islam, prevalent in Iran and Iraq, whose members are far less numerous than Sunnis.", "Shia Islam", "H"]
["Some Catholics celebrate it following mass under the alternate name of Shigmo, and those belonging to the Banjara tribe mark it by a series of specialized dances. Among the legends associated with it are the murder of a woman who possessed poisonous breast milk, the evil Pootana, and the chasing away of the demon Dhundi. It is typically celebrated on the full moon day, or Poornima, in the month of Phalgun and is characterized by consumption of the drink thandai [thun-DYE] laced with bhang [bung], a form of cannabis. It chiefly commemorates the devoutness of Prahlad, the love of Rati and Kami, and the worship of Krishna. FTP, name this Indian spring festival characterized by large bonfires and people throwing colored powders and water on each other.", "Holi", "H"]
["In this work, a scribe records that a dead man sells another dead man a house, and this work notes that certain individuals \"never tasted the cup of tranquility,\" advising against the literal interpretation of verses such as \"And verily Our host shall conquer.\" Hooper Dunbar produced a \"companion to the study\" of this text, and near the end of its first section, the book addresses the learned of Bayan to not forget its teachings. This book addresses such confusing terms as \"Seal of the Prophets\" and in one verse explains that backbiting should be treated as an error and that by cleansing and purifying his heart, the knowledge of the Ancient of Days is available to the true seeker. This text was written in two days and two nights in 1861 in Baghdad, where the Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h was in exile. For 10 points, name this primary Bah\u00e1'\u00ed holy text.", "The Book of Certitude ", "H"]
["When he is introduced he is described as having \"strove in battles dire, / In unseen conflicts with Shapes, / Bred from his forsaken wildnerness, / Of beast, bird, fish, serpent, and element, / Combustion, blast, vapour, and cloud.\" He creates the realm of Ulro, which is governed by his laws, and whose beings are ensnared in his \"net of religion,\" except for his fourth son, a Moses figure who leads the people in flight out of this figure's world and who is represented by fire and named Fuzon. The most famous depiction of him might be in his formulator's watercolor etching of him, The Ancient of Days, which was created in 1794, the same year the \"Book\" of him was written. Denoted as one of the four Eternals, or Zoas, who are descended from Albion, FTP, name this \"Primeval Priest\" and central figure in the mythos of William Blake", "Urizen", "H"]
["This religious leader presided over the creation of the Church of Cyprus after being commissioned for his most important task by Pope Celestine I. This man's teachings were upheld after his death by Flavian of Constantinople, though his own successor supported Eutyches and presided over the Robber Synod; that man was Dioscorus. This man argued for the use of the title Theotokos, and along with Memnon he was condemned by a rival synod set up by John of Antioch. Most notably, this man created the official doctrine on the two natures of Christ, leading the condemnation of Nestorianism at the Council of Ephesus. For 10 points, name this bishop of Alexandria who shares his name with the brother of Methodius who created a Slavic alphabet.", "Cyril of Alexandria", "H"]
["This creed was the official religion of the Uighur Empire under Khagan Boku Tekin, and a minor sect of this religion was known as the \"mat-squatters\". Titus of Bostra and Epiphanius of Salamis were among this group's detractors, while Adimantus was considered an apostle of its founder in northern Africa. Some of its teachings were contained in the now lost Book of Pragmateia, and other scriptures include the Book of the Giants and a work dedicated to Peroz. Naimrael and the demon Ashaklun and considered the parents of Adam and Eve, the results of the third creation overseen by the Messenger, who is subordinate to a figure whose aspects are called the Five Tabernacles. The Shapurikan is a work of this religion's founder, who saw the world as controlled by the Father of Majesty and the King of Darkness. Founded by a third-century Persian prophet, for 10 points, identify this dualistic Gnostic sect of which St. Augustine was a member before converting to Christianity.", "Manichaeism", "H"]
["In one of these works, Lord Dumbello becomes engaged to Lady Griselda Grantly, much to the chagrin of Lady Lufton. In another, Roger Scratcherd is sent to jail after killing Henry, the brother of Thomas when Mary is made pregnant. Another tale in this series of works involves John Bold, who uses The Jupiter to bring down Mr. Septimus Harding's Hiram Hospital. That work is followed up with a novel about Grantly's anticipated position is given to Reverend Proudie after the title Cathedral's bishop dies. For ten points, name this collection of works that includes Framley Parsonage, Doctor Thorne, The Warden and Barchester Towers, six novels by Anthony Trollope", "Chronicles of Barsetshire", "H"]
["Theologian Albert Outler placed Scripture, Church Tradition, Reason, and Personal Experience in a \"Quadrilateral\" of ideas central to this sect. In works like Promise of the Father, Phoebe Palmer helped initiate the \"Holiness Movement,\" an offshoot of this sect's doctrine of \"entire sanctification\" in which original sin can be cleared before death, as espoused in its founder's A Plain Account of Christian Perfection. Most churches of this sect adhere to the Arminianism of its founder, who claimed \"I felt my heart strangely warmed\" during a religious meeting at Aldersgate. The American church of this sect adopted the Cross and Flames logo in 1968 after merging with the Evangelical United Bretheren and tacking the word \"United\" to its name. For 10 points, name this church which used to be famous for open air preachers like Dinah Morris and Humphrey Clinker and was founded by John Wesley.", "Methodism", "M"]
["This belief teaches that the Earth and moon split apart sometime after the creation, which occurred at least 76 trillion years ago, and it also asserts that Earth was once home to a supercontinent simply called \"Asia.\" It holds that a passage in Ezekiel about a wheel \"gleaming of beryl\" is actually describing the \"Mother Plane,\" a spaceship that cost fifteen billion dollars in gold to construct. This religion's creation story holds that 6,000 years ago, a scientist named Dr. Yakub grafted a light race into existence, and its theology also claims that God appeared in July 1930 to W. Fard Muhammad. For 10 points, name this offshoot of a major monotheistic religion, led by Louis Farrakhan.", "Nation of Islam", "M"]
["In one story, he made the bitter waters at Marah sweet by throwing in a tree that God showed to him. During one battle, the Amalekites were vulnerable as long as his hands remained in the air, prompting two other men to hold up his arms until the sun went down. At the request of God, he once cast his staff to the ground, causing it to become a snake, a feat later replicated by his older brother. The younger son of Amram and Jochebed and the brother of Miriam, he brought a variety of plagues on the land of Egypt to convince the pharaoh to release the Israelites. For 10 points, name this brother of Aaron who received the Ten Commandments from God on Mount Sinai.", "Moses", "M"]
["Upon ascending to his highest office, he married Aseneth, the daughter of a priest of On. He gave his first son by Aseneth a name meaning \"oblivion,\" while his nephews were given names like Belah, Ashbel, Gera, and Ehi to honor him. He planted a silver cup in one of his brothers' bags in order to test them; Judah would loyally demand that this man sacrifice him instead of Benjamin. He tricked his dying father into blessing his son Ephraim before his other son Manessah, and was appointed Viceroy of Egypt after advising the storage of grain based on his analysis of the Pharaoh's dream. For 10 points, name this first son of Rachel and Jacob who had a multicolored coat.", "Joseph", "M"]
["The text \"Transmissions of the Lamp\" describes the lineages of this religion's followers. The \"Wake-up\" and \"Bloodstream\" sermons are attributed to one of its founders, who is said to have descended from the man who developed it after hearing the Flower Sermon. Its six patriarchs include Sengcan the author of the Plaform Sutra, Huineng, and it was brought to China by Bodhidharma. Two of its \"five houses\" include the Soto and the Rinzai, which differ on the way achieve satori, and it uses texts like The Gateless Gate and The Blue Cliff Record. For 10 points, identify this sect of Buddhism, which is noted for its use of koans and meditation.", "Zen", "M"]
["In Ojimbwe myth, the grandson of Nokomis, Manabohzo, successfully disguised himself as a rabbit in order to obtain this object from an old man and his daughter. In the Aeneid, Latinus seeks out an oracle after seeing a wreath made of it on the head of his daughter, Lavinia. In Hinduism, this is believed to have seven tongues and carry prayers and soma to heaven, and is personified by the messenger Agni. Temples to the Roman goddess Vesta featured virgin priestesses assigned to guard an eternal one. For 10 points, name this substance, which was stolen against the will of Zeus and given to man by Prometheus.", "Fire", "M"]
["This religion's scriptures include the four books of Athlyi, which form the Holy Piby, as well as The Promise Key. Its members reject \"-isms\" and use words such as livification, overstanding, and upfulness. Ingesting shellfish, pork, or alcohol is prohibited because they turn the temple of the body into a cemetery, according to its diet, called I-tal. Its holidays include \"reasonings,\" and adherents are taught to reject \"Babylon\" and that corruption can be burned out of the heart by smoking ganja, or cannabis. For 10 points, name this religion whose prophets include Marcus Garvey, which believes that Jah, or God, took the form of Haile Selassie.", "Rastafari", "M"]
["Jacobus de Voragine's Golden Legend relates that this figure was a king of Canaan inspired by a hermit to take up the occupation for which he was most famous. He was martyred during the persecutions of Decius, where he was decapitated and his large body was dragged through the streets, and in some stories he is described as a dog-headed cannibal. The most famous legend surrounding this figure centered on a child who turned his staff into a palm tree after this man helped him cross a raging stream. For 10 points, name this patron saint of travelers, who once carried a very heavy Christ child across a river, an act from which his name is derived.", "Saint Christopher", "M"]
["One of this religion's texts follows the seeker through places named for Search, Knowledge, and Wonderment, before arriving in the \"Valley of True Poverty and Absolute Nothingness.\" Along with The Gems of Divine Mysteries, that work, The Seven Valleys, was written by this religion's founder. After the death of this religion's Guardian, its Hands of the Cause announced the election of its ruling body, the Universal House of Justice. Haifa is the site of the tomb of one of its holy men, the Bab. Its texts include the Most Holy Book and the Book of Certitude. For 10 points, name this religion, an offshoot of Shi'a Islam that venerates all major prophets and the Baha'u'llah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "M"]
["In Ephesus, this man enraged a mob of silversmiths by preaching against their idols of Artemis. Along with Barnabus, this man healed a disabled man in Lystra and was mistaken for a Greek deity, while his divinity was proven when he survived a snake bite while shipwrecked on the island of Malta. His assistants were Timothy and Titus, and he once sent the slave Onesimus to take a dispatch to Philemon. Along with Peter, he is the focus of the book of Acts, and he had a notable conversion experience when God revealed Jesus to him on the road to Damascus. For 10 points, identify this saint and Apostle who ministered to the Gentiles and who wrote a number of Epistles.", "Paul the Apostle", "M"]
["This belief's adherents trust that the third savior Saoshyant will bring about the \"final renovation.\" Vishtaspa was the protector of their founder, who taught about the conflict between truth and lies, known as asha and druj. This religion's first man is Gayomart, and one sect of it believes in the timeless, apathetic god Zurvan. Hymns of this religion include the Gathas and the Yashts, which can be found in the Yasna. Parsi practitioners of it are placed in towers of silence when they die, and its sacred texts are found in the Zend-Avesta. For 10 points, name this faith that centers on the conflict between Ahriman and Ahura Mazda and was formed by a namesake Persian prophet.", "Zoroastrianism", "M"]
["This figure once launched Maricha across the ocean, after which he killed Subahu with his bow Kodanda in order to allow Vishwamitra to conduct a sacrifice. A son of Vali and Tara named Angada served as one of his messengers, and this figure befriended Guha, king of the Nishaadas. He forced his wife to climb a funeral pyre to test her purity, and after Kaikeyi got this figure banished, Bharata put his sandals at the foot of his throne. He helped recover the kingdom of Sugriva and was accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and the vanara Hanuman to fight the rakshasa king of Lanka, Ravana. For 10 points, identify this husband of Sita and seventh avatar of Vishnu, the subject of an epic by Valmiki.", "Rama", "M"]
["In one story, this man saved the town of Gubbio by making a pact with an attacking wolf. After spending time as a Perugian captive, he saw a vision of a hall full of cross-marked armor, which encouraged him to travel to Apulia. After 40 days' fasting on the mountain La Verna, he saw a six-winged seraph, after which he received the stigmata, according to his namesake Fioretti. He praised Sister Death, Brother Fire, and Brother Moon in his Canticle of the Sun, and was credited with inventing the Nativity creche scene. For 10 points, identify this Catholic patron saint of animals, the founder of a namesake group whose first two orders are the Poor Clares and the Friars Minor.", "Francis of Assisi", "M"]
["Its name may be compared to the Arabic word \"rawiyyah,\" and it repeatedly uses the term \"hevel.\" In matters of friendship, this book claims that \"a new friend is as a new wine: when it is old, thou shalt drink it with pleasure.\" Its closing section, \"Advice for the Young,\" advises the reader to \"Rejoice...in thy youth.\" Its author states that \"the heart of the foolish is in the house of mirth,\" and notes that there is no new thing \"under the sun.\" After the author introduces himself as Qoheleth and declares he is a son of David, he realizes that \"Vanity of vanities...all is vanity.\" For 10 points, name this Old Testament book following Proverbs that claims \"to everything there is a season.\"", "Ecclesiastes", "M"]
["Zipporah placed the central object of this action on Moses's feet, and God commanded Joshua to do his en masse at Gilgal. One notable incident of this action is celebrated on a January 1 feast day in the Eastern Orthodox Church. Genesis 17:10 is an important scriptural source about this action, and is usually interpreted as ordaining normally forbidden action on the Sabbath. This practice is alternatively referred to as Taharah in Arabic, and is usually called Tihan. Known as a bris milah in Judaism, it takes place on the eighth day after birth. For 10 points, name this action, that when performed on Jesus, resulted in the Holy Prepuce's formation.", "Circumcision", "H"]
["One figure by this name wrote the oldest known Hebrew text on geometry, but a more famous figure by this name was the son of Hachaliah. He incurred dishonor by disparaging his predecessors, including Daniel, and after his death, his homeland was annexed to the satrapy of Coele-Syria. He was antagonized by the false prophetess Noadiah while rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem, a task he undertook when he was made the tirshatha of Judea by his employer, Artaxerxes I. For 10 points, name this Biblical figure, an opponent of interfaith marriage whose namesake book was compiled by the same figure who put edited Ezra and Chronicles.", "Nehemiah", "H"]
[". One of the best-preserved places of worship for this religion is located beneath the Church of San Clemente. Two important figures in this religion, Cautes and Cautopates, were believed to represent the equinoxes and are usually seen holding upward and downward facing torches. Its temples were lined with couches and featured a central image known as the tautochrony. Accompanied by a dog, serpent and scorpio, this religion's central figure is often depicted wearing colorful pants and a slave's cap. Ranks such as \"corax\" were applied to initiaties in this group, who worshipped the figure who slayed a sacred bull in order to release the forces necessary for life. For 10 points, name this religion, an offshoot of Zoroastrianism that was popular among soldiers in the Roman Empire.", "Mithraism", "H"]
["Laying the foundation for one of these structures involves using 101 threads which are woven together and suspended above the ground by 301 nails in the \"tana\" ceremony. A minimum of two Nas\u00e2s\u00e2l\u00e2rs use non-wooden implements to transport objects to these structures, whose three concentric circles represent both the ideals of good deeds, good words, and good thoughts, and the division into places for men, women, and children. Each one has an accompanying pit in which clothing is destroyed by sulfuric acid, and at its center is the astodan, in which bones are collected. Commonly found in the environs of Bombay, they avoid polluting either fire or earth, by allowing vultures to remove flesh. For 10 points, name these structures used to expose the dead in Zoroastrianism.", "Tower of Silence", "H"]
["Before this event, a solitary meal is eaten in order to avoid a zimmun. The Va'eschanan parsha is read on this day, which marks the end of the \"Three Weeks.\" Delayed by a day if it falls on the Black Sabbath, it sees the reading of qinot, and the Talmud says that the Messiah will be born on this day. Among the events that occurred on this day are the issuance of the Alhambra Decree and a decree concerning forty years of wandering; it also marks the destruction of the First and Second Temples. For 10 points, identify this sad day on the Jewish calendar, which is named for its position in a Hebrew month.", "Tisha B'Av", "H"]
["One religion says that this figure was taken to the Orissa region for instruction in the Jagannath Temple, and appeared to a couple named Claudius and Juliet, Roman pagans, on the Tiber River. In another religion, this figure is known as \"kdaba,\" and was originally Mandaean, but perverted the prophecies of his mentor and became an evil figure, like Moses and Abraham. A claimed disciple of this man, a son of Patek, died at Gundeshapur at the hands of Bahram I. Among the figures who have claimed to be him were Marshall Applewhite, the leader of Heaven's Gate, and David Koresh. For 10 points, name this figure recognized in Islam as 'Isa, believed in by the so-called \"Jews for\" him, and by a messload of Christians.", "Jesus", "H"]
["This topic was the primary subject of the 1102 Council of London, and it was at the center of the trial of Sarah White Norman, who was forced to make a public apology in Plymouth colony. Groups which have supported it included the League of 1948, in Denmark, and the Mattachine Society founded by Harry Hay in 1951. The name \"Urning\" was created by Karl-Heinrich Ulrichs in his periodical to describe it; against his wishes, Paragraph 175 in the German Criminal Code was passed. The subject of a scathing treatise by Peter Damian, one man attempted to amend Paragraph 175 against it and was executed, Ernst Rohm. English monarchs associated with it include Edward II and James I, and Roman emperors include Trajan and Nero. Queen Victoria did not criminalize the female type because she didn't believe it existed. FTP, name this practice of being attracted to members of one's own gender.", "Homosexuality", "H"]
["Secundus of Tigisis layed the foundations for it at the Synod of Cirta when he was forced to call off his investigation of traditors. \"Laudes Deo\" was the cry used by members of its proselytizing wing, which was known as the Agonistici. Prominent members include Tychonius and Parmenianus, and this group particularly targeted bishops who had surrendered their Bibles during persecutions. The controversy over them was sparked by Felix of Aptunga's ordination of Mensurius's successor, Caecilianus, as bishop of Carthage. For 10 points, name this North African heresy that said priests who had sinned could not perform valid rituals.", "Donatism", "H"]
["Along with a \"station\" found nearby, this object originally produced sufficient light to cover the entire world. Ideally, the dua is said while leaning against a spot on a nearby wall, called the al-multazam, halfway between this object and the doorway to the building that contains it. A ring and a silver band have kept it intact ever since it shattered into three large pieces and several smaller fragments. In the tenth century, the Qarmatians stole and sold back this object, which may be an impactite-type meteorite from the Wabar Crater. It is believed to have acquired its present color from absorbing sins after it was given to Adam during the fall from paradise. For 10 points, name this object inset into the east wall of the Kaaba, believed to have been used to build the structure by Abraham and which is kissed by Muslims on the hajj.", "Black Stone", "H"]
["One work in this form points out that that people must continue \"to earn their own living\" because no one can \"eat bread without paying.\" Another suggests that \"to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife.\" Another of these is written on behalf of a slave and advises the slave's owner to treat Onesimus as if he were the author. Another of these exhorts its readers to \"work out salvation with fear and trembling\" and their author advises arming oneself with the \"helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God\" in one written to the Ephesians. For 10 points each, Galatians, Philippians, and Romans are all examples of what type of communication by a certain early Christian apostle?", "Pauline epistles", "H"]
["An amulet containing a prayer dedicated to one of these people led to a controversy which ended the practice of excommunication among a certain group. One of them was the godson of Augustus III of Poland who adopted the title \"Baron of Offenbach\" and used incestuous orgies to demonstrate his suspension of prior laws. The most notable one was propaganized for by the author of The Treatise on the Dragons, Nathan of Gaza, and founded the D\u00f6nme after being imprisoned at Abydos in the \"Tower of Strength.\" That one became the doorkeeper to Mehmet IV after converting to Islam. For 10 points, Osman Baba, Jacob Frank, and the seventeenth-century Kabbalist Shabbethai Zevi were all examples of what people, who were unable to deliver on their promises of redeeming Jews?", "List of messiah claimants", "H"]
["Hippolytus referred to this man as \"stump-fingered\", and it has been speculated that he cut off his thumb to disqualify himself from Jewish priesthood. The Church in Egypt claims this man as its founder. The only reliable information on this man is in Philemon 24, in which he is mentioned as sending greetings to the Christians of Colossae, and the Apostolic Father Papias of Hierapolis stated that this man recorded the teachings of St. Peter. Identified as the man who fled naked at Jesus' arrest, for 10 points, name this patron saint of Venice and traditional author of the second Synoptic Gospel.", "Mark the Evangelist", "H"]
["This religion has a namesake \"Steele\" in the city of Xi'an, indicating that it was accepted by the Emperor Taizong. Babai the Great resurrected a version of this heresy, while another notable proponent was Theodore of Antioch. The Assyrian church of the east continues to follow a version of this doctrine, which rejected the term \"Theotokos\" for Mary. Cyril of Alexandria violently opposed this heresy, and along with Manicheism, it was denounced at the Council of Chalcedon. For 10 points, name this heresy denounced at the Council of Ephesus which believed that Christ exists in two natures, named after an Archbishop of Constantinople.", "Nestorianism", "H"]
["This gathering condemned the belief that the world had three ages corresponding with the three persons of the Trinity as proposed by Joachim of Flora. It also declared Constantinople's primacy superior to all other patriarchies, but inferior to that of the Pope. In wake of the formation of the Franciscans, the creation of the Order of the Friars Preachers was discussed here, though this council later prohibited the establishment of new religious order to allay fears that the Church was becoming too diverse. The most important result of this meeting was establishing the doctrine of transubstantiation. For 10 points, name this 1215 council presided over by Innocent III at a palace.", "Fourth Council of the Lateran", "H"]
["At one point, this book's protagonist joins two sticks together to represent a reunited Israel, while earlier he is forbidden to mourn his wife after her sudden death. It is one of the few books of the Hebrew Bible to depict Ophanim, or Thrones, and its middle sections are largely concerned with oracles against Tyre and Pharaoh. Chapters 38 and 39 concern Gog and Magog, while its 47th chapter describes a stream flowing from the right side of the temple, whose description occupies its last nine chapters. Opening with a vision of God at the river Chebar, for 10 points, identify this penultimate book of the major prophets, which includes a scene in the valley of dry bones.", "Book of Ezekiel", "H"]
["One prayer said on this occasion asks, \"Repel the Red One in the nethermost shadow,\" while another says \"we are not permitted to make use of them, but only to look at them.\" The school of Shammai taught that the central ritual of this holiday should be done in reverse of its usual order. An object inscribed with an acronym for \"a great miracle happened there\" is used during this holiday, which remembers the installation of a new altar following the expulsion of Antiochus IV, on the twenty-fifth day of Kislev, and the use of a single portion of olive oil for eight days. For 10 points, sufganiyot, latkes, and other fried foods might be eaten during what wintertime Jewish holiday?", "Hanukkah", "H"]
["According to the midrash, it was created on the fifth day, and it's carcass finds many uses, both as an excellent material for building a sukkah as told by the prayer at the end of Sukkot and as one of three creatures used as food for the people. According to Rashi, it was one of the Taninim, and there were originally both a male and a female, but Yahweh killed the female out of fear that their offspring would wipe out the human race. It bears thematic resemblance to a seven-headed creature slain by Baal in Canaanite myth. For 10 points, name this Biblical monster, companion of the ziz and the behemoth, a giant sea serpent that gives a name to a work about absolutist governance.", "V", "H"]
["The Tennessee Supreme Court ruled in Swann v. Peck that this practice can legally be prohibited. The passage suggesting this practice, which first swept the Grasshopper Valley, goes on to say that \"when they drink deadly poison, it will not hurt them,\" and some of the people who do this also purposely ingest strychnine. This practice is common in the Oneness Pentacostalism denomination and the Church of God With Signs Following, and was popularized by George Went Hensley, who read in Mark 16:18 that \"they will pick up\" a certain animal \"with their hands.\" For 10 points, name this backwoods Christian practice that often results in dangerous bites.", "Snake handling", "H"]
["Hatach serves as a messenger in one portion of this book, and later Harbonah pipes up to reveal the existence of a fifty-cubit-high structure owned by a man known by the obscure terrm \"Agagite.\" One character in this book is exiled or killed when she refuses to appear before the king with the \"crown royal.\" That queen, Vashti, is replaced by the title character, an adopted cousin of Mordecai. Along with the Song of Songs, this is the only other Biblical book not to directly mention God. The new queen of Ahasureus stops a plot by Zeresh and Haman to kill the Jews in this book, which is read aloud during Purim. For 10 points, name this book of the Tanakh, taking place in Persia.", "Book of Esther", "H"]
["It was not codified until the 1091 Synod of Beneventum by Pope Urban II, though, in the Lives of the Saints, Aelfric notes its practice as in the 990s. It occurs between Quinquagesima Sunday and Quadragesima Sunday, and readings on it are usually taken from the Book of Joel, Corinithians II, and the Gospel of Matthew. In the Catholic Church, the priest wears a violet cope and it's known as dies cinerum, while Eastern Orthodoxy replaces it with Clean Monday. For 10 points, name this day that marks the beginning of Lent with its namesake cinders and comes immediately after Shrove Tuesday.", "Ash Wednesday", "H"]
["One small section of this work features five prayers addressed to different parts of the day. Including the Nirangistan fragments, one set of twenty-one poems in it is dedicated to various yazatas, or angels, and ancient heroes, while the Siroza identifies the gods who preside over the thirty days of the month. In it, the Vendidad describes construction of the Towers of Silence and offers a dualistic account of creation. Its core is a set of seventeen hymns that includes the Ahunavaiti and Ushtavaiti, the Gathas, thought to be the words of the prophet who began evangelizing Iran around 600 BCE. For 10 points, name this Zoraoastrian text.", "Avesta", "H"]
["St. Hilarion was accused of being a magician after blessing these items in Gaza for a man named Italicus. It is the traditional item depicted on ema, plaques on which Shinto worshippers inscribe wishes or prayers, and Zoroaster converted King Vishtasp and his family by curing a black one. In the Ashvamedra sacrifice, the sacrificer's chief wife simulates copulation with the corpse of this creature. One named Burak accompanied Gabriel to Mount Sinai, and the female protagonist of the Song of Songs is compared to one of these animals belonging to the Pharaoh. For 10 points, name this animal, a pale one of which is ridden by Death.", "Horse", "H"]
["In the Shariputra Sutra, the Buddha tells a tale about impersonating Goldenglow, the king of these animals. This animal symbolizes the female bodhisattva Janguli, and its tail is found on the Chinese creature Feng-huang. One god who takes this form moved two halves of a white pearl around the universe and lived among the men of L\u00e2lish for a time; that is Melek Taus, the central figure of the Yazidi religion. Karttikeya rides one into battle, and, in Greek myth, its appearance was caused by the rescue of Io by Hermes, and the subsequent dispersal of the hundred eyes of Argus onto it. For 10 points, name this bird which symbolize Hera using some large and multicolored plumage.", "Peafowl", "E"]
["At the end of this book, the high priest Eleazer dies, and the bones of Joseph are buried at Shechem. Earlier, eight chapters had been devoted to a description of land allotments to the Israelite tribes. A mass circumcision occurs in chapter 5, while in chapter 9 the Gibeonites trick the title figure into making a truce with them. During the defeat of a coalition led by Adonizedek, the sun stands still, and earlier the river Jordan was divided to allow the Israelites to cross. For 10 points, identify this book in which Rahab and her family alone are spared when its namesake destroys Jericho.", "Book of Joshua", "E"]
["This religion celebrates the new year with the Baisakhi festival. Adherents are required to wear an undergarment at all times, which is called the Kachcha, and an iron bracelet once they are baptized, which is called the Kara. A dagger is used to stir the water used for the baptism in this religion, which is one of the five Ks that is a part of this religion. The last of a certain group of leader of this religion established the militaristic Khalsa movement, and its sacred text is known as the Adi Granth. For 10 points, identify this religion whose \"Golden Temple\" is found in Amritsar, and which was founded by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["Christopher Columbus heavily annotated a copy of Pierre d'Ailly's Imago Mundy, which suggested that it was located in the Canary Islands, while some traditions place it on the Isle of Lewis off of Scotland.", "Garden of Eden", "E"]
["One group celebrates this holiday by waking up before sunrise and taking a bath in oil. The last day of this holiday is dedicated to sisters, who place vermilion masks on their brothers' foreheads. Occurring on the dawn of Ammavaasa in the month of Kartik, this holiday commemorates the legend of King Bali, and its celebrants light diyas and exchange sweets to commemorate the birth of Lakshmi. Celebrating the victory of Rama over Ravana, this five-day festival features brilliantly colored fireworks and candles. For 10 points, name this Hindu holiday, known as the \"festival of lights.\"", "Diwali", "E"]
["This belief system features both an \"Upper\" and \"Ultra\" class of deity, who are both members of a class known as the Three Pure Ones. Works venerated in this religion focus on \"Great Peace\" and \"Response and Retribution,\" while another key text is known as a \"Treasury.\" The Dream of the Butterfly was discussed by a key scholar of this religion, Zhuangzi, while its most famous text is often known as \"The Book of the Way.\" Wu Wei iss espoussed by, for 10 points, what mystical, ritualistic religion founded in China by Lao Tze?", "Taoism", "E"]
["In this religion, Jahi is a figure described as a \"primeval whore\" who kissed an evil deity and thus brought menstruation upon the world. Sraosha is one of the guardians of Chinvat, a bridge to heaven that either narrows or widens depending on a person's behaviors. Azhidaka is a famous demon in this religion, while other figures include Gayomart, the first man, and various Amesha Spentas. Most famous for two figures senator Henry Davis of Maryland wrote about, an attempt to reconcile those two figures with monotheism brought about the Zurvanist heresy. A cosmic battle between Ahriman and Ahura Mazda, for 10 points each, name this religion.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["Much of it was edited by the head of the Sura Academy, Ashi. The only part of the Zeraim it addresses is the Berkhot, and it was written by the Amoraim. The longer, second version of this became binding as the basis of (*) responsa. Existing in both Babylonian and Palestinian versions, for 10 points\u0097 name this collection of commentaries on the laws in the other part of the Talmud, the Mishna.", "Gemara", "H"]
["They are the only people who can enjoy the sixth abinha power. They are often depicted artistically in groups of sixteen, and they are equivalent to the lohans often painted by Guanxiu. This (*) status is the culmination of a path which begins with a stream-enterer and proceeds through the once-returner and the non-returner. For 10 points\u0097 name these achievers of nirvana in Theravada Buddhism", "Arhat", "H"]
["He became popular by defeating the Ammonites at Jabesh-Gilead, after which he was acclaimed at Gilgal. This man tried to turn his daughter Michal against her husband and massacred the priests of Nob, and he (*) appointed his cousin Abner to command the army while ruling from Gibeah. Later, he received bad news from the witch of Endor. For 10 points\u0097 name this figure crowned by Samuel as the first king of Israel.", "Saul", "H"]
["Charity given in preparation for this festival should be in the form of actual food. It always occurs in Shawwal, and involves wearing (*) new clothes and having communal prayers and meals. For 10 points\u0097 name this three-day festival whose name means \"breaking the fast\" and which follows the end of Ramadan.", "Eid al-Fitr", "H"]
["Those who are not allowed to practice this are known as \"muqallids\" or \"imitators\" because they are bound by \"taqlid.\" Methods such as qiyas, or analogy, and ijma, or consensus, were once ways to do it. Sunnis have declared since the fourth Islamic century that the (*) \"gates\" of this are closed, though Shia still recognize \"mujtahids.\" For 10 points\u0097 name this practice of putting forth new interpretations of Sharia law.", "Ijtihad", "H"]
["One of these people patronized the alchemist Geber and formed a court including the founders of the Mutazsili, Malikiyah, and Hanaiyah schools. Another, Al ar-Rida, was allegedly poisoned by his political rival. The last one underwent the (*) \"ghaybah,\" often translated as \"occultation,\" and is considered \"hidden\" by the Twelvers. For 10 points\u0097 name these original leaders of Shia Islam.", "Imam", "H"]
["According to these people, their creator originally intended their genitalia to be placed on their foreheads, but they were placed lower due to an otter's mistake. A Yaunkur warrior kills Dangling Nose and marries Shipish-un-mat in their epic Kotan Utunnai. Their original moon goddess was so unable to stand all the adultery she saw that she asked to become their sun goddess; her name is Chup-Kamui. They performed a ceremony called Keo-mante to send the spirit of Chira-Mante-Kumui back to his mountain heaven during Kumamatsuri, their Bear Ritual. FTP, identify these ? hairy people, the original inhabitants of Japan.", "Ainu", "H"]
["The Menok i Khrat gives the best account of the fatalist type of this religion. In the ninth century, this religion was worshiped by the brother of Manushchihr, Zatsparam. This religion is divided into the Materialist type, the religion of the zandiks, and the \"Classical\" type, which worships the central figure as the creator instead of his son. Ardashir Papak made this the state religion of the Sassanid Empire, and statues depict the central figure of this religion with a snake coiled around his body. The main figure of this religion offered sacrifices for one thousand years in order to bear a son, and eventually conceived ? twins representing good and evil. FTP, name this branch of Zoroastrianism which worships the androgynous, neutral god of infinite space and time.", "Zurvanism", "H"]
["While this painting was on display in the \"Egyptian Hall\" in Piccadilly, its artist painted proto-Realist lithographs such as Pity the Sorrows of a Poor Old Man for his collection, Various Subjects Drawn from Life and on Stone. Savigny and Correard provided the primary source material for this painting. Its artist had originally planned to use the traditional abolitionist image of a shackled man praying, and women were also present in early versions depicting a mutiny. Eugene Delacroix posed for this painting, whose artist allegedly made preliminary sketches such as Study of Arm and Two Feet for it at a ? morgue. It includes a gray haired father who mourns his dead son, as well as a hollow torso on the left and a bloody hatchet implying cannibalism. FTP, name this painting where an African man waves a shirt at the top of a human pyramid to attract the attention of a ship in the distance, a work by Theodore Gericault.", "The Raft of the Medusa", "H"]
["During this period, one figure consulted a piece of quartz crystal, seeking to attack a neighboring tribe which had killed his father, but after being forbidden three times by the crystal's divining arrows, he shouted at it \"Go bite your father's penis!\" The Fitan records that \"the buttocks of the women of Daws wiggled before Dhu al-Khalasah\" during this period. Samiri brought the golden calf to Moses during this period. At its end, a general was sent to Nakhlah to destroy a sanctuary, and eventually saw a naked woman with wild black hair and slew her, thus destroying Al-Uzzah. This period included important fairs at Ukaz and Mina', and an prominent deity of this period was turned into in a doorstep. Famous for figures such as Imru' al-Qays and for the establishment of ka'abas at Sindad, Najran, and Makkah, for twenty points, name this period before Islam where deities like Al-Lat, Manat, and Hudal were worshiped.", "Jahiliyyah", "H"]
["That of \"The Light\" discusses the idea of zina, which means ornamentation and might refer to jewelry, to breasts, or to hair, while that of \"The Earthquake\" discusses an eschatological sorting process. The second, that of \"The Cow,\" discusses Gog and Magog and also contains the \"Verse of the Chair,\" which is often recited. They are divided into ayat and can be classified by which of two cities they originated in. The first is \"al-Fatiha\" and begins with \"bismillah ar-rahman ar-rahim.\" FTP, identify these chapters of the Qur'an.", "Surah", "H"]
["This religion's places of worship are reached by paths called sando and contain sacred ropes with hanging flax pendants and a gohei, or wand with hanging strips of paper. Its priests wear white socks and black sandals, and today its places of worship often contain fortune vending machines, whose bad fortunes are usually tied to a pine tree, and a sacred mirror to commemorate the end of a certain dance in this faith's lore. With deities such as the fox-loving Inari, the war god Hachiman, Uzume, Susano'o, and Amaterasu, this is, FTP, what native religion of Japan?", "Shinto", "H"]
["Members of this religion follow a creed known as the fravarane and refer to their faith as the Daena. One branch of this religion worships the personified concept of space-time known as Zurvan, and its holy texts include Vendidad as well as the Yasna, a liturgical codex which contains the Gathas, its oldest known documents. Other figures in it include the six archangels known as the Amesha Spenta and the mediator figure Mithras. FTP, name this religion set forth in the Avesta and containing the evil Ahriman and the good Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["This work that begins in 600BC is often criticized for the \"lost 116 pages\" as well as for anachronisms such as mentioning horses or using the Greek word \"Christ.\" The hill Cumorah, where it was discovered, was likely also the site where its namesake commanded the losing Nephite army against the Lamanites. That namesake entrusted the Golden Plates to his son Moroni, who is usually equated with the angel who showed them to Joseph Smith. FTP, name this religious testament sacred to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.", "Book of Mormon", "H"]
["Hans Nielsen Hauge founded a branch of this denomination that emphasizes mysticism. This denomination's texts include both a small and a large catechism as well as the Smalcald Articles, which can be found in a collection of its ten most important documents called the Book of Concord. Major divisions of it in the United States include the Missouri and Wisconsin synods, and it accepts the doctrine of consubstantiation and holds that man is saved through grace alone. FTP, name this Protestant denomination that originated in Wittenberg with the 95 Theses of its founder.", "Lutheranism", "H"]
["Early adherents of this religion defined five types of infinity and two types of energy, one called jada that comprised matter and chetana, which made up life. Its most important prayer is the Namokar mantra, and the Tattvartha Sutra is among its most sacred lierature, and followers adhere to the nine Tattvas. Its 24 Tirthankaras, or rediscovers of dharma, include Adinath and Mahavir, while members of its Digambar branch refuse to wear clothing. FTP, name this Indian religion whose adherents follow the principle of ahimsa, a strict code of non-violence.", "Jainism", "H"]
["Heretical groups to break off from this religion include the Minas sect and the Udasi sect, and each sect disagrees over which biographies of this religion's founder, called Janamsakhis, are canonical. Its followers wear the \"five K's,\" which include a metal bracelet and a comb. This religion's leaders included Tegh Bahadur, who was martyred, and Ram Das, who founded Amritsar, but Gobind Singh was its last guru and was succeeded by the Adi Granth. FTP, identify this religion of the Indian subcontinent that was founded by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "H"]
["A textile worker of this religion caused a scandal in 1996 when he was imprisoned as an Israeli spy. This religion's adherents worship on Friday and Monday evenings in khalwa and are divided into the ignorant and enlightened, or jihal and uqqal. Followers of this religion went to war in 1925 under Hasan al-Atrash, and its five principles are symbolized by its five-colored, five-pointed star. Followers of this religion believe that the Fatimid Caliph al-Hakim, who rode off and disappeared, went into occultation and will someday return. FTP, name this breakaway Islamic sect prominent in Lebanon and Israel named for al-Darazi.", "Druze", "H"]
["The Talmud says he was \"armed with a sharpened scythe\" when he destroyed Sennacherib, but he was clothed in linen when he appeared with eyes \"like burning lamps\" to speak to a servant of the Babylonian court. Earlier, he had explained that a horned ram augured the destruction of Persia and said that \"seventy weeks of years\" would pass before the coming of a savior. Associated with mercy, he appears twice in the New Testament, in which he informs Mary she is pregnant. In Islamic tradition, he commanded Muhammad to \"recite\" after bringing the Qu'ran. FTP, name this archangel, the messenger who communicates between God and man.", "Gabriel", "H"]
["In this religion's cosmogony, the Primordial Man is raised to the Paradise of lights and Adam and Eve are engendered by two captive particles of light. The two major sects of this religion were the Elect, successors of the founder, and the Hearers. Its followers believe prophets like Buddha and Jesus were sent to the earth by the Father of Lights. Many works in the Persian and Uyghur empires were written in this faith's namesake script. In his Confessions, St. Augustine recounts nine years when he was adhered to this dualistic faith. FTP, name this Gnostic religion developed Sassanid Persia in the 3rd century A.D., which was based on the writings of the prophet Mani.", "Manichaeism", "E"]
["The Tachash animal was created to provide skins to cover this object, and the Quran states that it will be found by the Mahdi in Lake Tiberias. David brought it to the house of Obed-edom the Gittite after Uzzah was smitten for touching it, while the people of Ashdod were afflicted with hemorrhoids for refusing to give it back. It also caused the statue of Dagon to twice be prostrate towards it, while manna and Aaron's rod are two of its contents. For 10 points, name this sacred vessel containing the tablets of stone with the Ten Commandments.", "Ark of the Covenant", "E"]
["One of his early exploits was being injured in a battle at Uhud against an army led by Abu Sufyan, but he later won the Battle of the Ditch. This man was born into the Banu Hashim branch of the Quraysh tribe, and local opposition to his ideas led to his flight from his hometown, called the hegira. Despite several medieval examples to the contrary, most modern sects prohibit any artistic depiction of, for 10 points, what man who was visited by the angel Jibreel to transcribe the Quran, thus founding Islam?", "Muhammad", "E"]
["In one story, he traveled to Egypt with his wife and claimed she was his sister, letting her join the pharaoh's harem. He paid tithe to the priest Melchizedek, and is buried in Machphelah underneath a mosque. His wife was visited by angels whom she served unleavened bread, and his grandson wrestled with an angel after stealing Esau's birthright. This merchant from Ur helped rescue Lot from a raiding party, and his wife's handmaid Hagar bore him a child. For 10 points, name this husband of Sarah who fathered Ishmael and almost sacrificed Isaac.", "Abraham", "E"]
["He had a vision of a boiling pot from the north causing destruction, and he was a supporter of Josiah's reforms and an opponent of Jehoiakim. He stated, \"I do not know how to speak, for I am only a youth,\" when he was called to prophesy by Yahweh, and he was saved from prison by the Ethiopian eunuch Ebed-melech. Some traditions have him being stoned to death by his fellow exiles in Egypt, and his scribe was Baruch. For 10 points name this prophet, who placed a yoke around his neck in his call to submit to the yoke of Babylonia.", "Jeremiah", "E"]
["One scholar of this faith wrote the commentaries called the Naryuktis. Their claim over mount Shatrunjaya was protected by a decree of Jahangir. This faith believes that the earth has different kalpas, or time cycles, and this faith's teachings come from \"fordmakers\" called the twenty-four tirthankaras. Practicing \"ahimsa\" and divided into two major sects based on whether nudity is required, for 10 points, name this religion that includes the Svetambaras and Digambaras and was founded by Mahavira on principles of nonviolence.", "Jainism", "E"]
["Uttaradhyana provides an account of the explanation of this to Kesi, a disciple of Parava. The samparyahka posture facilitates its occurrence in an account by Kalpasutra. Nirodha, subha, and satya are three of its eight attributes, while it is described as \"expedient means\" in the Lotus Sutra. It is often likened to Satori, which, like Kensho is temporary, but this concept implies freedom from samsara, the cycle of rebirth, and from suffering. For 10 points, name this state of perfect peace attained by the Gautama Buddha.", "Nirvana", "E"]
["He divided his country up into twelve districts so that every district would spend one month supporting him. His father-in-law, a pharaoh, burned down the Canaanite city Gezer as a gift for this man, and he gave advice such as \"the treacherous shall be uprooted from the land.\" He is attributed to writing a song about \"the rose of sharon and the lily of the valleys,\" and in a dispute between two harlots he decided to cut their child in half. For 10 points, name this king, visited by the queen of Sheba, who succeeded his father David.", "Solomon", "E"]
["This religion's ceremonies include \"bingis,\" involving drumming all night, and \"itation,\" which is an Iyric abbreviation for meditation. This faith uses the l-tal dietary laws, and practitioners attempt to reach a consciousness named \"I-and-I.\" Their God, Jah, has his seat in Ethiopia, and they believe that all American blacks will be repatriated in Africa. For 10 points, name this religion that believed Haile Selassie was the messiah and which advocates smoking \"ganja.\"", "Rastafari", "E"]
["In one festival associated with this belief system, bills containing the signatures of the King of Hell are made from Joss paper and burned. Feasts held by the Northern Celestial Masters of this religion notably lacked ginger, leeks, and onions, and this religion's ruler of heaven is the Jade Emperor. Zhuangzi proposed Ming as an intermediate state in its goal of attaining of effortless action or \"wu wei\", while it is likened to \"The Mysterious Female\" in its scripture, authored by Laozi. Featuring ying and yang, for 10 points, name this Chinese religion.", "Taoism", "E"]
["One cultic fire for this faith was called Farnbag and was transported to Kabulistan. The spherical primal man in this faith is Gayomart, and one heresy in this faith believes that time created the two major gods and is called Zurvanism. The founder of this faith wrote the hymns the Gathas, and the Parsi followers of this religion place their dead on dakhmas, or towers of silence, instead of using burial or cremation. With the holy text called the Avesta, for 10 points, name this Persian religion focusing on the evil Ahriman and his counterpart Ahura Mazda.", "Zoroastrianism", "E"]
["He stated in 1997 that Greenpeace and Amnesty International \"have taken over mankind's concerns\" from the likes of Michelangelo and Bach. A French-Columbian hostage was recently freed and hugged him during a private meeting; during captivity, Ingrid Betancourt had heard him praying for her on the radio. In 2006, he was rumored to have ordered a commission to investigate the morality of condom use, but he also stated that \"we wait for the instant in which Israel will say yes to Christ.\" For 10 points, identify this man, who succeeded John Paul II.", "Pope Benedict XVI", "E"]
["This holiday is known as Tihar among the Newa people, and in the place where this holiday originated, it culminates on the night of the new moon. Fairs called melas occur during this holiday, which partly commemorates the end of the twenty-one days of austerity for Shakti. Guru Harobind Ji's release from prison occurred during this festival, marking its importance for Sikhs. Also celebrating the attainment of nirvana of Mahavira for Jainists, for 10 points, name this holiday that commemorates the return of Rama, the Hindu \"festival of light.\"", "Diwali", "E"]
["In cities that were once protected by a wall, this holiday's \"Shushan\" version occurs. Gifts are given on this day to prove unity, a custom known as \"mishloach manot.\" Events that this holiday recounts include the festival of Ahasuerus, and one tradition on this holiday is drinking until the phrases \"Blessed is Mordecai\" and \"Cursed is Haman\" are indistinguishable. For 10 points, name this holiday celebrated on the fourteenth day of Adar, a holiday that commemorates the Jewish people's delivery from the Persians as told in the book of Esther.", "Purim", "E"]
["The Gnostic sect of the Cainites believes he was an instrument of the Sophia, or Divine Wisdom, while this man was transformed to look like his greatest friend in the Gospel of Barnabas. According to Acts 1:18, this man \"bought a field; there he fell headlong, his body burst open and all his intestines spilled out.\" His namesake kiss enabled soldiers of the High Priest Caiaphas to take a certain man into custody, and in exchange, he received thirty pieces of silver. Hanging himself from a tree in remorse, for 10 points, name this apostle who betrayed Jesus.", "Judas Iscariot", "E"]
["Before the Mincha prayer associated with this holiday, observers give Machatzit Hashekel or 3 halves of a shekel as charity. This holiday has a \"Shushan\" version, which is celebrated on its following day in walled cities, and it always occurs one month before Passover. Celebrated on the Fouteenth of Adar, some of its practitioners get so drunk as to be unable to differentiate between \"Cursed be Haman!\" and \"Blessed be Mordechai!\" For 10 points, identify this Jewish holiday, which celebrates Esther's victory over Haman's evil plans.", "Purim", "E"]
["One figure in this work orders to chop a tree plentiful in fruits, whose stump is then banded, and the reigns of Darius of Mede and Cyrus the Great are described anachronistically in it. Its final book describes the destruction of Bel and the Dragon. Its namesake has visions of four beasts coming out of the sea, and another involving a two horned ram from the East and also recounts the writing of \"mene, mene, tekel upharsin\" at Belshazzar's feast. For 10 points, identify this book from the Old Testament, whose namesake survives after being cast into a lion's den.", "Book of Daniel", "E"]
["One of its basic principles is anekantevada, which asserts the legitimacy of multiple points of view, and it holds that time passes in repeated utsarpinis and avsarpinis. Those who gain particular insight into the nature of dharma are called tirthankara. Its two sects are known as Svetambara and Digambara, meaning white clad and sky-clad. For 10 points, identify this Indian religion whose followers embrace nonviolence.", "Jainism", "E"]
["One group in this movement publishes such periodicals as Issues and Mishpochah Message and was founded by Martin Rosen. Some of these sects trace their lineage to a community led by James in the 30s CE, and many groups of this type advance a doctrine of \"completion\" through accepting a figure they usually call \"Yeshua.\" They are not permitted to use the Law of Return to claim Israeli citizenship, and no rabbinical group in the U.S. considers them Jewish. For 10 points, name this religious movement which combines Jewish rituals with acceptance of Christ.", "Messianic Judaism", "E"]
["Conrad Grebel exposited their beliefs to Ulrich Zwingli, who allowed the Zurich council to decide between them, while Martin Luther, speaking from Wartburg, provided stiffer resistance to the ministry of the Zwickau Prophets. Under the leadership of Melchior Hoffman they orchestrated the Munster Rebellion in an attempt to establish a theocracy. For 10 points, identify this religious group that sprung out of the Radical Protestant Reformation, whose central tenet arose from the idea that religious initiation should be deferred until after infancy.", "Anabaptists", "E"]
["Rites in this religion include the Ritual For Evil Spirits and the Road Gods' Ritual. Along with water and salt, a wand with white paper streamers is often used in purification ceremonies in this religion, and its holidays include Adults Day, when those who have recently turned twenty begin wearing adult clothing. Its symbols include gates known as torii and shrines which are rebuilt every twenty years. It worships gods and nature spirits known as kami and has proven compatible with imported Buddhism. For 10 points, name this indigenous faith of Japan.", "Shinto", "E"]
["This religion's prayers are called \"ardas\", and its practitioners are required to have a positive attitude called \"Chardi Kalah.\" A khanda is used to stir the amrit that is consumed during initiation into this religion and its members wear a kangha in their kesha and carry a ceremonial dagger called the kirpan, which are a part of the Five Ks. This religion's sacred text is called the Adi Granth, and is regarded as its current Guru after the death of Guru Gobind Singh. For 10 points, identify this religion, which was founded in the Punjab by Guru Nanak.", "Sikhism", "E"]
["Among the officials involved in this process are the postulator and the promoter group. The second step in this process earns one the title \"Servant of God\", once enough witnesses to \"heroic virtues\" have testified. The third step requires verification of those heroic virtues and investigation into a miracle, while the final step involves attribution of a second miracle. For 10 points, name this process one step beyond beatification, the process by which a Catholic becomes a saint.", "Canonization", "E"]
["Lack of anger, extreme tallness, and wish fulfillment by kalpa trees were experienced by people born in the Su?ama-su?am? era prophesized by this faith. Its underworld is the Adho Loka, and a mirror and a fish couple are two of its Eight Auspicious Symbols. The aim of one of its rituals is to transcend the jiva to experience Atman; this meditation is known as Samayika. The Digambara sect of this faith is notorious for its nudity, but preaches ahimsa and venerates the 24th tirthankara. For 10 points, name this Indian religion whose tenets were laid out by Mahavira.", "Jainism", "E"]
["This holiday starts four days later in the Ambrosian Rite as practiced by the Archdiocese of Milan. Though it is not Advent, the Gloria in Excelsis Deo hymn is not sung during this holiday, and the \"Funken\" bonfire occurs during its First Sunday. Purple veiling of statues used to occur during a time period observed prior to 1970, Passiontide, which corresponded to its last two weeks. It is preceded by the lavish Carnival and concludes on Holy Saturday. For 10 points, name this forty-day holiday celebrating Jesus' endurance of Satan's temptation in the wilderness.", "Lent", "E"]
["Joel and the people of Nineveh did this to avert God's judgment, and accidental violations of it and time discrepancies due to altitude are pardoned during one of these in Baha'i Faith lasting 19 days. A \"regular\" one happens two days a week in Charismatic Christian denominations, and Sikhism notes that it \"brings no spiritual benefit to the person\". Doing this causes one to gain taqwa in another religion, which acts a shield against Hell. Occurring from fajr to maghrib and regulated by Sawm in Islam, for 10 points, name this activity done during much of Ramadan.", "Fasting", "E"]
["The 26th of Nisan marks this man's yahrtzeit, which is held at Kifl Hares. He set up a great stone under an oak after taking leave of his followers, and the verse \"He that waits on his master shall be honored\" is usually attributed to him. Another of his feats saw him make the moon stand still in the valley of Ajalon so he could destroy an Amorite alliance in daylight. His house's cut of conquered Canaan was a forested mountain area, and he besieged Ai and a city where Rahab lived. For 10 points, name this conqueror of Jericho, an Israelite leader who succeeded Moses.", "Joshua", "E"]
["One of them attests to the veracity of a Cretan stating that all Cretans are liars, containing the stated Epimenides paradox. Another's kenosis passage is the only exception to a universal agreement of authorship, and references \"quiet cattle brow[sing] among the ruins\" marking the site of its title location. In addition to Titus, Philemon, and Philippians, another includes the quotations \"through a glass, darkly\" and \"when I was a child, I spoke as a child, I felt as a child, I thought as a child.\" For 10 points, name these writings sent by a certain Christian convert.", "Pauline epistles", "E"]
["An indigenous religion from this place believes that repeated use of incantations turns the speaker's tongue black and was headquartered at the \"edifice of nine swastikas.\" In addition to Bon, this region is the center of a denomination that uses the \"yab-yum,\" an image of coitus, for worship, and practices the Diamond Vehicle or Vajrayana. The Yellow Hat sect, once centered at Potala palace, formerly ruled this territory. For 10 points, name this place, from which current religious authority Tenzin Gyatso is exiled; a Buddhist, Asian land formerly ruled by the Dalai Lama.", "Tibet", "E"]
["Four adherents of this religion, including William Robinson and Mary Dyer, were hung in Boston Common for returning to Massachusetts colony despite their banishment. William Edmondson and John Archdale were notable early adherents of this religion, and a refuge colony for them was given to one adherent by King (*) Charles II as payment for a debt owed to his father. Also known as the Religious Society of Friends, for 10 points, name this religion founded by George Fox and whose adherents included the founder of Pennsylvania, William Penn.", "Quakers", "E"]
["Involvement with Nicolas Cop led to this man's flight from France following the Affair of the Placards. This author of a commentary on Seneca's De Clementia defended his faith in a letter to Jacopo Sadoleto. This man's followers tried and executed Michael Servetus, and he preached for a time with Martin Bucer in (*) Strasbourg. He also worked with Guillaume Farel and wrote Institutes of the Christian Religion. For 10 points, name this protestant leader who preached that God would save only the predestined Elect during his time in Geneva.", "John Calvin", "E"]
["This religion's calendar consists of nineteen months of nineteen days each, and also commands men to fast for nineteen days. It operates a nine-sided temple in Wilmette, Illinois, and a \"House of Justice\" in Haifa, (*) Israel, which is also the location of the tomb of this religion's founder. That founder, whose real name was Siyyid Ali Muhammad, took a name meaning \"the gate\" and was executed by firing squad in 1850. For 10 points, name this religion founded by the Bab and carried on by Baha'u'llah.", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "E"]
["The four classes within this group included the chaplains, servants, and sergeants. They also acted as secure transporters of gold, earning them the wealth needed to purchase Cyprus from Richard the Lion-Hearted. Founded by Hugh de Payens, they displayed a red cross on a white background. Pope Clement V was pressured to condemn them, leading to the burning of their (*) grandmaster Jacques de Molay, as part of a plot to seize their wealth by Philip the Fair of France. For 10 points, name this order which formed to protect Christian pilgrims to Jerusalem.", "Knights Templar", "E"]
["One poem in this book is depicted in a two-column, alternating style in the Sefer Torah and is the poem \"The Song of the Sea.\" Chapter thirty of this book tells of the construction of an altar of incense as part of the story of the construction of the tabernacle. In chapter twenty, (*) Moses receives the Ten Commandments, and chapters seven through ten tell of God unleashing a series of plagues when a pharaoh refuses to let his people go free. Detailing the story of Moses leading the Israelites from Egypt, for 10 points, name this second book of the Old Testament.", "Exodus", "E"]
["They are divided into two groups of five great Septs by the Vindhya Mountains, and members of this group derive their name from an aspect that is paired with the universal spirit, Atman, in the Upanishads. Initially the whole world consisted of this group, but those who embraced passion became (*) Kshatriyas, while those who embraced goodness and passion became Vaisyas. The highest of the four varnas, they are responsible for performing vital religious tasks and reciting sacred scripture. For 10 points, name this priest class of the Hindu caste system.", "Brahman", "E"]
["In one section of this work, the prophet Ether recounts the story of Jared from the valley of Nimrod. This work's two main sections are bridged by the \"words\" of its namesake, who discusses the appearance of false prophets during the reign of King Benjamin. It opens with an account of (*) Lehi and Sariah, whose sons marry daughters of Ishmael, and introduces the origins of the Lamanites and Nephites. For 10 points, name this religious work revealed by Moroni and transcribed from golden plates by Joseph Smith, the foremost Latter Day Saints scripture.", "Book of Mormon", "E"]
["In 1969, this man became vice president of the University of Regensburg, and three years later he worked with Hans Urs von Balthasar and Henri de Lubac to create the journal Communio. He went to the International Mariological Congress in 1978 as the special envoy of (*) Pope John Paul I, one year after becoming Archbishop of Munich and Freising. In 2002, he became Dean of the College of Cardinals. For 10 points, give the papal name of Joseph Alois Ratzinger, who succeeded John Paul II in 2005.", "Pope Benedict XVI", "H"]
["The most reliable information on him is in Philemon 24, in which he is mentioned as sending his greetings from Rome to the Christians of Colossae. His leaving Perga caused Paul and Barnabas to split up, the latter traveling with this man to Cyprus. He is said to be the founder of the Church in Egypt, and he is the patron saint of Venice. Papias claimed that this man was Peter's secretary, and his book is the earliest Gospel and the primary source for information on the ministry of Jesus. For 10 points, name this traditional author of the Gospel that comes between Luke and Matthew.", "Mark", "H"]
["One group believes that the \"epiklesis\" must be performed at this event's start. Other doctrines about this event include the belief that it leads to a certain entity being \"in, with, and under\" and the \"doctrine of the real presence.\" In 1215, the Fourth Lateran Council adopted the Catholic position on this event. Its origins are in four Biblical passages where Jesus says \"this is my body\" and \"this is my blood.\" For 10 points, name this Christian ritual, that Catholics believe involves transubstantiation, and which consists of the ritual consumption of bread and wine.", "Eucharist", "H"]
["Denouncing someone behind his or her back offsets the benefit gained from observing it, and one of the practices it prohibits can be done until a white thread is easily distinguishable from a black one. One of its days marks the time that a certain object was revealed to Samaa Adunya; that \"Night of Measures\" is known as the Laylat al-Qadr. Six nonconsecutive days of Shawwal follow it, and the main activity during it is known as sawm. It ends with the iftar, but it is ceremoniously broken by the Eid ul-Fitr. For 10 points, name this month of fasting in Islam.", "Ramadan", "H"]
["The Christian sect named after this holiday is closely related to the Charismatic movement, and is split into Trinitarian and Oneness branches. Known in Judaism as Hag Shuvuot, this holiday stems from the Book of Acts, which claims that there was a \"mighty rush of wind\" and that the Apostles spoke in tongues on this day. An alternate name for this holiday stems from the white garments typically worn on it. For 10 points, name this holiday also known as Whitsunday, the fiftieth day after Easter.", "Pentecost", "H"]
["Feathers and a wooden spoon are used to clear out olive-shaped items by candlelight prior to it, and its Islamic analog is celebrated on the 10th of Muharram. The Chol HaMoed refers to its intervening days, and historically, care was taken as to not break the bones of a certain animal. That animal was sacrificed in a namesake Korban, eaten on the 15th of Nisan, along with maror and matzo. All food items not kosher for it are known as chametz, and the Seder is eaten on the first two of its nights. For 10 points, name this holiday celebrating God's sparing of the Jews.", "Passover", "H"]
["Its school in Edessa was closed by imperial edict, and this sect was condemned by one council for denying the title of Theotokos, or God-Bearer, for the Virgin Mary. The Indian portion of this sect was known as the Christians of St. Thomas, and its namesake was an early bishop of Constantinople. Sometimes called the Assyrian Church and the Church of the East, those who reunited with the Roman church in 1551 were called Chaldeans. Condemned at the councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon, for 10 points, name this Christian set that stressed the independence of the human and divine natures of Jesus Christ.", "Nestorianism", "H"]
["One incident in this book describes the repulsion of the Amalekites by holding a staff aloft. This book contains the identification of God as \"I am what I am,\" the appearance of manna, the incident of the Golden Calf and the Ten Commandments, and the story that inspired the eating of matzah during Passover, in which the Israelites are unable to finish leavening their bread. For 10 points, name this book describing departure of the Israelites from Egypt, the second book of the Old Testament.", "Book of Exodus", "H"]
["After the birth of this figure, the seer Asita predicted his greatness, and he died after the blacksmith Kunda accidentally gave him some toxic food. According to one story, his father Suddhodana prevented him from witnessing any suffering, but one day he witnessed a poor man, a sick man, and a corpse. Eventually, this sparked him into sitting under a Bodhi tree and finding enlightenment. For 10 points, name this Indian founder of a peaceful Asian religion with branches like Mahayana and Zen.", "Gautama Buddha", "H"]
["One form of this god had the head of a scarab beetle, and according to one legend this god's tears became bees. This god is sometimes aided by the helpful snake Mehen, who has a namesake board game. This god changed into a giant cat and tore off the head of the evil serpent Apep, and the war goddess Sekhmet is sometimes called the \"eye of\" this god, who emerges each day in the east and departs in the west. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of the sun, who is sometimes combined with Amon.", "Ra", "H"]
["This section of a longer work exhorts its readers not to \"throw pearls before swine, lest they...turn to attack you.\" One episode in it deals with five virgins who forget oil for their lamp and five others who remember it. This book also relates the washing of Pilate's hands and the massacre of the innocents, and contains phrases like \"Blessed are the meek\" as part of the Beatitude section of its Sermon on the Mount. It opens with a long genealogy of Jesus. For 10 points, name this synoptic gospel, the first book of the New Testament.", "Gospel of Matthew", "H"]
["The term \"shirk\" is used in this religion to describe the sin of attributing divine traits to non-divine beings. Members of this religion use prayer beads to recite the ninety-nine names of God. Buraq is a flying horse that the founder of this religion used to make the \"Night Journey,\" in which he ascended into heaven while visiting Jerusalem. Sects of this religion include the Seveners and the Twelvers, whose name denotes how many imams they recognize. For 10 points, name this religion, founded by Mohammad, that worships Allah.", "Islam", "H"]
["The Macedonian Heresy was condemned at the Council of Constantinople because of views on this figure. The filioque clause controversy between the Orthodox and Catholic churches is a dispute over where this figure comes from. In the Bible, this figure is depicted as giving the power to speak in tongues after causing fire to appear over the heads of the Apostles at the first Pentecost. Its role is to help people lead a Christian life on Earth. For 10 points, name this third person of the Trinity that is not the Father or the Son.", "Holy Spirit", "H"]
["One book revered by adherents of this religion is the Kebra Nagast, and the oneness with the spiritual is expressed with the doctrine of \"I and I.\" Dietary restrictions observed by some followers of this religion include a ban on cigarettes and coffee, and are known as Ital. Other important tenets of this religion include a rejection of \"Babylon\" and connection to Jah. For 10 points, name this religion whose adherents often wear dreadlocks and smoke ganja, which celebrates Grounation Day as the day Haile Selassie traveled to Jamaica.", "Rastafari", "H"]
["According to some sources, the first man in this belief system was Gayomard, and its founder was first patronized by Vishtaspa. All souls must cross the Chinvat Bridge in this faith, and the dead are laid out on Dakhmas, or Towers of Silence, to keep earth and fire uncontaminated. This religion's Gathas tell of malevolent spirits called Daevas, who are opposed by the Amesha Spentas. Its main scripture is known as the Avesta. For 10 points, name this religion in which Ahriman is opposed by Ahura Mazda, a Persian religion founded by Zarathustra.", "Zoroastrianism", "H"]
["This man's disciples included Theodore Beza, and during the Synod of Dordtrecht this man's views were attacked by the Dutch theologian Arminius. This man's theology was based on the \"Five Points,\" which were outlined in Institutes of the Christian Religion. This man's views were carried to Scotland by John Knox, the founder of the Presbyterian Church. For 10 points, name this Swiss theologian from Geneva who believed in predestination and names a branch of Protestantism.", "John Calvin", "H"]
["Moore v. Illinois held that state-imposed penalties for harboring a fugitive slave did not contradict one clause in this part of the Constitution. That clause immediately follows a clause dealing with the return of fugitives from justice. The Defense of Marriage Act notably excludes same-sex marriage from being covered under one part of this article, the \"full faith and credit\" clause. For 10 points, name this article of the U.S. Constitution, which also includes the \"privileges and immunities\" clause and follows the article dealing with the judiciary branch.", "Article Four of the United States Constitution", "H"]
["Secret societies in this religion include Bizango and Sampwel, and branches of this religion include Manding, Nago, Rada, and Daome. Danbala and Ogou are celebrated on the saints' days of Patrick and James, respectively. The residents of Ginen in this religion include anvizib, or invisibles, and zanj, or angels. It is dedicated to serving various lwa, or saints, who include Legba and Baron Samedi. This religion has its roots in the Kongo, Dahomey, and Yoruba cultures. For 10 points, name this religion of African origin prominent in Haiti.", "Voodoo", "H"]
["This group believes that Kishkumen created a society of robbers that assassinated figures like Ceezoram, who had succeeded a son of Helaman as chief judge. This group believes that Mosiah passed on rule of Zarahemla to a series of chief judges, and in their holy book, a battle in Cumorah is fought between the Lamanites and Nephites, resulting in the destruction of the latter. Moroni and his father survive and they work on plates, eventually discovered by Joseph Smith. For 10 points, name this offshoot of Christianity, most famously led by Brigham Young.", "Mormonism", "H"]
["Baba Rabba reorganized this religious group, which holds Mount Gerizim sacred, and at one point they were centered near Neapolis, or Shechem. One member of this religious group has had five husbands, but is not living with her husband, according to Jesus, who meets that woman at Jacob's well. Another member of this religious group only appears in the Gospel of Luke, and is contrasted with a priest and a Levite. For 10 points, name this religious group with beliefs similar to Jews, a \"Good\" one of which helps an unknown traveler.", "Samaritans", "H"]
["The beta star of Perseus is named after one of these figures, and the nasnas is an edible descendant of one of these and a human found in Yemen. The sil'ah is one type of these that encourages men to dance. Another of these, which can also be identified as a qutrub, is known for being a man-eater. Also consisting of mar'id and ifrit, they predate the existence of Adam, and the most famous of their ranks is Iblis. These creatures made of smokeless fire inhabit a parallel world to the human world. For 10 points, name these magic-using creatures from Islam.", "Jinn", "H"]
["One major artwork of this religion was a statue of Bahubali, built by the ruler Chamundaraya in Shravana Begola. Among this religion's scholars were Jinasena, and Hiravijaya, a teacher of the ruler Akbar. Gacchas in this religion are groups of monks and followers, and the religion is divided into the Digambara and Shvetambara sects. It reveres twenty-four tirthankaras, the last of whom, Mahavira, is regarded as the founder of this religion. For 10 points, name this Indian religion, whose followers practice the doctrine of ahimsa, or nonviolence.", "Jainism", "E"]
["One of this belief's holy texts states that those who \"tread the path of faith\" and \"thirst for the wine of\" truth \"must cleanse themselves of all that is earthly.\"", "Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith", "E"]
["According to John Chrysostom, they were baptized by St. Thomas following their most important task, and their name comes from the caste they were a part of in their former religion. They were led by what they believed to be a frivashi signaling an important birth, and a dream warned them not to trust a man to whom they had promised to return. Their failure to return with information led to the killing of all boys aged 2 and under in a certain city, known as the Massacre of the Innocents. For 10 points, name this group whose most famous task is celebrated by the Epiphany, a group who followed the Star of Bethlehem in order to present the infant Jesus with gold, frankincense, and myrrh.", "Biblical Magi", "E"]
["Central notions of this group include marifa, while the hadarat are the levels of tajalliat and baqaa. Members hope to achieve fana, or self-annihilation, and their number includes the author of the Conference of the Birds. Muraqaba is used to acquaint oneself with the Six Subtleties and they are organized into tariqas, examples of which include the Chishti and Mevlevi. Famous exponents include the author of the Masnavi, Rumi, and in their search for love initiates are called dervishes. Taking their name from their wool clother, for 10 points, name this mystical sect of Islam.", "Sufism", "E"]
["According to Hebrew lore, this creature stayed in the Garden of Eden as Adam was banished. Some traditions say a Chinese version of it is called feng huang, a mythical creature that rules the southern sky. Ancient Egyptian accounts call it the Bennu, and depict it with two feathers on its head. Accounts since then place it in Arabia, from which it returns to the Heliopolis about every five hundred years. Known for building nests of myrrh and frankincense, this is, for 10 points, what unique bird known for its crimson color and ability to hatch a replacement after catching fire?", "Phoenix", "E"]
["In Book IV of Summa Contra Gentiles, Thomas Aquinas wrote about the \"Need of\" them, and in another work are said to resemble the stages of natural life. One of these serves the purpose of integrating the recipient into an established body, and another one involves pouring oil on the recipient and is known as Extreme Unction. There are three types of these - those of Vocation, Healing, and Initiation. Exorcism is not one of these, although it is usually performed alongside the first one of Initiation. Catholics acknowledge seven of these, although Protestants believe in only two. For 10 points, name these rites, which include Holy Orders, Reconciliation, and Baptism.", "Sacrament", "E"]
["According to some Muslims, this object will be removed from Lake Tiberias by the Madhi. The Kebra Nagast claims that it was stolen by Menelik I, who left it in Aksum. A woman gave her son a name meaning, \"where is glory?\" after it was taken to the temple of the idol Dagon, where the idol was found broken below this object. Its top is decorated with the outspread wings of two cherubim which face each other, and it holds manna and the staff of Aaron in addition to its most notable contents. For 10 points, name this container, sacred to Judaism, that contains the tablets bearing the Ten Commandments.", "Ark of the Covenant", "E"]
["This was called a \"sin against nature\" and was said to \"rusteth the chisel\" in Ezra Pound's Canto XLV [45]. Martin Luther wrote a Long Sermon on this, and Aristotle condemned it as unnatural in his Politics. As an attack on Adam Smith, Jeremy Bentham wrote a \"Defense of\" it. Pound's Canto XLVI [46] attacks the Bank of England for this, and in The Divine Comedy, people who practiced this profession were committed to the seventh circle of hell. For 10 points, name this profession of Shylock in The Merchant of Venice, the making of money by charging interest on loans.", "Usury", "M"]
["(SS) This man created the Kirtland Safety Society to raise money for his organization's operations, and was arrested for bank fraud after assaulting David Patten for challenging him. His organization moved around often, at one point getting expelled from Missouri into Illinois, where he was eventually shot and killed by an angry mob. There was some confusion over who would succeed him; candidates in- cluded his son by the same name and another son, Samuel. His organization believes in the story of the golden plates, which he discovered. They speak of Jesus walking among indigenous people, the descen- dants of Jews who had migrated to the New World several hundred years before his birth. Name this man who was followed by Brigham Young as the leader of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.", "Joseph Smith", "M"]
["(DT) It is eighteen chapters long and is found within the 6th book of a much larger work. This work recommends the path of devotion, or bhakti-yoga [bahk-TEE YOH-ga], for those who choose to worship a personal god, since eventually the devotee will choose to perform actions for that god. It claims that one goes to heaven for as long as one's punya [POON yah] is not used up, but that the ultimate goal is moksa [MOHK shah]. Stemming from one figure's initial decision to not fight his own relatives, the backdrop of it is a conversation between Arjuna [ahr JOO nah] and his charioteer, Krishna. Identify this text, found within the Mahabharata [mah HAH bah RAH tah].", "Bhagavad Gita", "M"]
["(JG) Do not give an answer in English. An eruv [AIR oov] can be constructed for purposes related to this, whose desecration is the worst possible crime. Observant individuals refrain from what is called muktzah [MOOK tzah], thirty-nine specified activities, and are called shomer [SHOH mair] this. Songs are sung in the kabbalat [kah buh LAT] service the evening before, including \"Yedid Nefesh\" [yeh-DEED NEH-fesh] and \"L'cha Dodi\" [lih-KHAH doh-DEE], which anthropomorphizes it as a bride. It ends with rituals including spices and a candle with several wicks, havdalah [hahv DAH lah], and Yom Kippur [YOHM kee POOR] is a special case of this day. Give the Hebrew name for this holiday that begins at sundown on Friday nights and is celebrated every Saturday, the Jewish sabbath.", "Shabbat", "H"]
["This man once cut up Agag, the king of the Amalekites, for leaving women childless. He was called in the night to replace Hophni and Phineas as a high priest due to the unfaithfulness of their father, Eli, after he was dedicated to God by his mother Hannah. He helped usurp another son's claim to power by not appointing Jonathan as heir to the king. That king learned of his future by raising this man from the dead with the help of the Witch of Endor. For 10 points, identify this last Hebrew judge and namesake of two books of the Bible, the anointer of both Saul and David.", "Samuel", "H"]
["One legend states that he freed the town of Gubbio from an attacking wolf. G.K Chesterton wrote that this man was visited by a six-winged seraph on the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross and received the stigmata. He wrote of his love for Sister Moon and Mother Earth in his Canticle of the Sun. He is credited with creating the first Nativity creche scene, and his mission inspired a noblewoman to begin a group of women followers, the Poor Clares. For 10 points, identify this Roman Catholic patron saint of animals and founder of a namesake group of friars.", "Francis of Assisi", "H"]
["One section of this work is named for the \"Words\" of the title figure, and claims that King Benjamin personally fought with the Sword of Laban. A figure named Aminadab becomes a morally depraved prison guard in a section of this work named for Helaman. This work dubs certain modern-day people as descendents of Lamanites, and this work uses the definition \"a honey bee\" to describe a place called Deseret, and key figures in it include Nephi and Moroni. For 10 points, name this work, \"another testament of Christ\" that was supposedly written on 1400-year-old gold plates found by Joseph Smith.", "Book of Mormon", "H"]
["Ammianus Marcellinus, a Saint named for this, was among the first to note this day, saying it occurred on the same calendar day as the Miracle at Cana. Chileans once called it the Day of the Blackmen, while the Irish refer to it as Little Christmas. Luke calls it the \"Revelation to the Gentiles.\" Matthew 2 tells of its Western tradition that includes its main actors returning to their own countries by another road instead of returning to Herod. For 10 points, identify this Christian feast celebrated in Eastern Churches as the date of Christ's Baptism, and in Catholicism as the visit of the Magi.", "Epiphany", "H"]
["During the sixteenth century, these people developed a partnership with the neighboring Maronites to increase their silk production. They refer to themselves as al-Hawim and al-Mawahhidun, people of one God and unity. Letters from their founders al-Hamza and al-Hakim are collected in their scripture, the Rasa'il al-Hikma, or Book of Wisdom. Their beliefs in universal soul, mind, and word and good and evil are represented in their five colored star symbol and forbid conversion to or from their faith. For 10 points, identify this breakaway unitarian sect of Shi'a Islam concentrated in Syria and Lebanon.", "Druze", "H"]
["Notable examples of these can be found at the Silver Pavilion, at the Ryoan Temple, and at Daisei-in. Loraine Kuck popularized them in the United States, including the somewhat innaccurate term that links them to a religious philosophy. They often use the \"kare sansui\" approach, as in those designed by Soami. For 10 points, name these creations which suggest water and other natural features by minimal arrangements of sand and stones, and are often found at the temples of a popular sect of Japanese Buddhism.", "Garden design", "H"]
["In one appearance, this figure sang a brief ditty about a \"horse and rider thrown into the sea\" by God. This woman was struck with a tzaarath after badmouthing her brother's marriage, but was healed when her brother prayed \"O Lord, make her well.\" This woman's cup is sometimes placed alongside that of Elijah during the Passover Sedar, and she once placed her brother in a basket in the reeds so that he could avoid Pharaoh's call for all newborns to be slaughtered. For 10 points, name this daughter of Amram and Jochebed, the sister of Aaron and Moses.", "Miriam", "H"]
["The Adi Granth states that if God desired Sikhs to undergo this, it would have already occurred naturally. Freud posited that it originated in Egypt in Moses and Monotheism, and King David once killed two hundred Philistines in exchange for a wife after Saul demanded one hundred products of this. Genesis notes that God commands Abraham to do this to himself and all male members of his household. Fro 10 points, identify this ritual procedure, not always performed on Gentiles, that involves trimming the foreskin.", "Circumcision", "H"]
["Children are known to scream during a reading on this day during the name of a Persian Prime Minister, whose defeat is celebrated on this holiday. In that reading, the Queen fasts for three days before presenting herself to the King. That Queen, the namesake of a book also called the Megillah, convinces Ahasuerus to not follow Haman's plan to kill all Persian Jews. The Talmud states that, for 10 points, on which Jewish holiday is a person required to drink so heavily that he cannot tell the difference between the phrases, \"Cursed be Haman!\" and \"Blessed be Mordechai!\" as they fete the work of Esther?", "Purim", "H"]
["Mormons often engage in this activity on the first Sunday of the month, giving money saved as an offering to the church. Some Hindu women do this to boost the well-being and longevity of their husbands in an act called karwa chauth. Luther concurs with Catholic theology, saying that those taking Communion should do this the previous hour. Rules on this in Judaism ban the brushing of teeth during days where it is practiced due to water usage. For 10 points, name this activity practiced by Jews on Yom Kippur and by Muslims during the days of Ramadan.", "Fasting", "H"]
["Sameer S. Vohra notes the similarity between this practice and similar practices in the United States in a Journal of Legal Medicine article about a certain group's \"Right to die.\" Abu Hanifa an-Numan founded one school of this practice, the Hanafi, which supported the Witr prayer. Other groups organized around this practice include the Maliki, Shafi'i, and Hanbali, which are known as the four Madhhabs. The supposed sixth \"infallible man,\" Jafar as-Sadiq, founded Shi'ite school for this practice. The arbiters of this practice are a group of scholars known as the Ulema, whose give a ruling known as a fiqh. For 10 points, name these systems of Islamic law.", "Sharia", "M"]
["This movement founded in the 18th century was opposed by a group whose name literally means those who oppose. Founded on the two principles of religious panentheism", "Hasidic Judaism", "M"]
["It begins with the deaths of brothers Chilion and Mahlon and their father. Chilion's wife Orpah decides to remain in her homeland, but the title character, her kinsman, the wife of Mahlon, instead chooses to stay with a woman who instructs her to call her Marah, the wife OF", "Book of Ruth", "M"]
["This book calls for a woman to bring two doves or two pigeons to her priest on the eighth day after the beginning of her menstrual cycle, one of which is burned as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering. It also relates the tale of Nadab and Abihu, sons of Aaron, who presented a \"strange fire\" in the tabernacle and were burned by God and buried outside the camp. In recent years, its most discussed prohibition has been in Chapter 18, Verse 22, which suggests that one should not \"lie with mankind as with womankind,\" read by evangelicals as a prohibition against homosexuality. With a name meaning \"And he called,\" for 10 points what is this third book of the Pentateuch?", "Book of Leviticus", "M"]
["In 2003, a court ruled that divorce via texting is allowable under this system. Principles used in banking under this system include wadiah, or safekeeping, and wakalah, which is akin to the power of attorney. Infractions of it are called hudud, and examinations of its workings are known as fiqh. Its tenets hold qiyas, or consensus, to fall below sunna and hadith in making judgments. For 10 points, what is this legal system, the main form of Islamic religious law?", "Sharia", "M"]
["His name means \"God hath helped\" in Hebrew, and the 13th-century Otia Imperiala of Gervase of Tillbury began the legend that late in his life he came to Gaul and became the first Bishop of Marseilles. According to Matthew and Mark, he took part in the banquet Simon the Leper held for Jesus, where his appearance created many Jewish converts, leading the temple priests to call for his execution. The brother of Martha and Mary, for 10 points, name this guy whom Christians believe was raised from the dead by Jesus.", "Lazarus", "M"]
["The most observant followers of this movement follow a dietary law called ital, and its sacred text is an altered version of the Christian Bible compiled by Robert Athlyi Rogers of Anguilla in the early 20th century, that being the Holy Piby. April 21 is a very important holiday because on that day in 1966, the man regarded as the messiah, Haile Selassie, visited this movement's central country. For 10 points, name this movement which advocates the hatred of the white race and is most associated with marijuana use, dreadlocks, and Jamaica.", "Rastafari", "M"]
["It is believed to be the spot where sakinah, or divine piece, led to one famous event, and the area outside of it is known as the mataf. It is in that area that the tawaf is performed, and this is covered with the kiswah. Facing the east is an object on which Adam frequently sat, but the sins of man have changed the original color of that object. Home to the black stone, for 10 points, what is this cubic building in Mecca to which Muslims pray?", "Kaaba", "H"]
["This was the first case cited for support in a 2008 Michigan Law Review Article where Erwin Chemerinsky argued that the Supreme Court should have recognized a right-to-die. This decision overturned the state supreme court case Naim v. Naim, and limited a state power recognized in the 1888 case Maynard v. Hill. Potter Stewart filed a short concurring opinion saying that this case had already been decided by the earlier McLaughlin v. Florida. This decision confirmed that Pace v. Alabama was no longer good law, and Earl Warren's majority opinion cited Korematsu v. United States to say that strict scrutiny was appropriate for racial classifications and suggests that there is no valid legislative purpose which makes the color of a person's skin the test of whether his conduct is criminal. The law struck down in this case made an exception for descendants of Pocahontas. For ten points, name this 1967 Supreme Court decision that struck down laws against interracial marriage.", "Loving v. Virginia", "H"]
["These peoples worshipped a sun goddess named Wurusemu, as well as a goddess of healing and medicine named Kamrusepa. The religious practice of these peoples involved sacred stele called huwasi stones. One figure from this mythology slays Illuyanka the serpent. These peoples' mythology includes the fertility goddess Arinna and the Gulsa Goddesses, who assist this culture's mother goddess, Hannahannas. An epic from this culture tells how one god bites off his father's testicles and spits them out, known as the Song of Kumbari, while the most famous story from this culture tells how Tarhunt the thunder god and others worked to bring back Telepinu, a foliage god who had gone into hiding. These peoples were heavily influenced by their neighbors, the Hurrians. For ten points, name this Anatolian culture whose language confirmed the theories of Ferdinand de Saussure about laryngeal consonants in Proto-Indo-European.", "Hittites", "H"]
["Phylacteries are worn during the minchah service on this day. A period in which meat is not consumed lasts from the beginning of the month in which this holiday occurs until after this day, with an exception on the Sabbath. Traditionally, the messiah will be born on this day. In addition to the Five Calamities, both the English and Spanish explusions of the Jews came on this day. The book of Lamentations is read on this day, which is the only sundown-to-sundown fast other than Yom Kippur. For 10 points, name this Jewish fast day which commemorates the return of Moses's spies from Canaan, the end of the Bar Kochba revolt, the razing of Jerusalem, and the destruction of both Temples.", "Tisha B'Av", "H"]
["One fiqh of this sect, the Akhbaris, is found mostly around Basra while other sects include the Usuli and the Akhbari and they observe the Mawlid on the 17th of Rabi al'awwal instead of the 12th. Mid-Shaban is a celebration unique to this group which honors Uthman al-Amri, who was the first of the Babs, which this sect believes served as messengers with holy instructions. This sect does not accept the hadith of A'isha. Also known as Ithna Ashari, for ten points identify this sect whose beliefs include the occulation of a hidden Iman, the largest sect of Shi'ism, which can be contrasted with the Fivers and Seveners.", "Twelver", "H"]
["The \"neo\" variety of this school of thought is associated Josef Kleutgen, Tommaso Zigliara, and Gaetano Sanseverino, and this school was the subject of the papal encyclical Aeterni Patris. G.K. Chesterton described this school of thought as \"the philosophy of common sense\", claiming that, unlike pragmatism, Hegelianism, or idealism, it views an egg as an egg. William of Ockham rejected this school of thought and criticized its concepts of active and passive intellect. In the Scholastic Era, it was associated with Dominicans from the Iberian Peninsula, but in the 19th century it was promoted by Pope Leo XIII, who declared it the basis of Catholic thought, a view expounded by all subsequent Popes. Followers of this school adhere to the thought of an Italian monk known as Doctor Universalis whose works included \"Summa contra Gentiles\". For ten points, name this school of Christian philosophy, which is singly eponymous after the first name of a certain Aquinas.", "Ba Phnum District", "H"]
["A soldier named Lucius Terentius Bassus left an inscription praising this god in modern-day Woerden in the Netherlands, which suggests that Minerva was considered his consort, though he was also paired with Urania. The rituals associated with this god are similar to the Akitu festival of Bablyonian tradition and to the worship of Shamash; those rituals were described by the historian Herodian. Originally from the city of Emesa, an object sacred to this god would be paraded through Rome on a four-horse chariot on the summer solstice, and the most notable promoter of this god would force Senators to watch him dance in front of a giant black stone before being deposed and killed. For ten points, name this Syrian sun god who shares his name with the crazy, short-lived boy emperor who tried to make him the official god of Rome.", "Elagabalus (deity)", "H"]
["Along with Modality and Time, this concept forms the title of a 1980 article by Rosenkratz and Hoffman that offers three definitions of this concept. Flint. Freddoso, and Wierenga popularized the \"shared histories approach\" for analyzing this concept, and Peter Geach identified meanings of this concept. Rabbis Yitzchok Kirzner and Harold Kushner engaged in a debate on this concept in the 1980's, sparked by Kushner's argument about the limits of this concept. Charles Hartshorne argued against this concept by modifying an argument from Plato's The Sophist which equates being with having power and adding the premise that every being has an active tendency, which, if one accepts that each being can resist every other being's power, makes this concept impossible. A paradox named for this concept was introduced by St. Augustine and involves an infamously heavy rock. For ten points, name this attribute that is generally associated with God, the ability to do anything.", "Problem of evil", "H"]
["False texts in this genre include one which describes a snake known as \"the bold\", who is said to enter graves and strike their inhabitants; that false text is organized as a list of fifteen punishments for those who derelict their religious duties. Another false text in this genre describes rewards being given out over thirteen days to reward those who pray, and a famous false one of these involves a story about smashing cross-shaped objects. These false texts are collectively known as the \"mawdu\". Rijal and Mustalah are the study of these texts, and the process of sanad involves checking the asnad of these statements. Groups of these include the sahih, the qudsi, and the sharif, which are differentiated by the credibility of their chain of transmission, and they are the second most important source for jurisprudence. For ten points, name these extra-Koranical sayings of the Prophet Muhammad.", "Hadith", "H"]
["The Book of Jubilees states that people who fail to obey this mitzvah are \"the children of Doom and eternal Perdition.\" A Sephardic tradition is to read portions of the Zohar related to this mitzvah as it is being performed. Those born during the forty years in the desert did not do this, and it was performed in mass at Gilgal. The Maccabees forcibly did this to people, and Jeremiah applies this to the states of both people's ears and their hearts. One can only be excepted from obeisance if they have had three brothers die from complications during it. For 10 points, name this covenant-fulfilling action whereby the foreskin is cut off.", "Circumcision", "H"]
["One leader of a sect of this group gained autonomy under the Peace of Arcoma and built a capital at the zawiyah of al-Bayda. Another sect of this group was founded by a man from Nevshehir and included Kaysuguz Abdal and Yunus Emre, who are considered its foremost poets. Ahmad ibn Ajiba was an adherent of a sect of this movement named for al-Darqawi. King Idris of Libya was an adherent of the Sanusiyya sect of this group, and another sect of these is named for Baktashi and was popular among the Janissaries. The Mevlevi order of Konya are a group of these whose unique cardioactive form of worship earned them the nickname \"whirling dervishes\". For ten points, name this foremost group of Islamic mystics.", "Pasukan Bola Sepak Maktab Mahmud Pokok Sena", "H"]
["The second section of this work begins by considering an example of trying to decide between five pennies or nickel in relation to \"Belief\" and \"Doubt.\" Other discussions include the \"parallelogram of force,\" the difference between the French \"Il fait froid\" [ILL FAY FWAH] and the English \"It is cold\" and arguments about transubstantiation. This work contends that meaning is related to \"habits of action,\" which allow intuitive definitions of reality and other concepts to be formed from their practical significance. Published in Popular Science in the series \"Illustrations of the Logic of Science\" after \"Fixation of Belief,\" FTP, identify this C.S. Peirce essay about consideration of sensible effects as the titular practice.", "Antarctica", "H"]
["Early in his career, this one-time assistant of Josef Frings was associated with Edward Schillebeeckx, Hans Kung, Karl Rahner, and other exponents of the \"New Theology\" movement. Along with Hans Urs von Balthasar and Walter Kaspar, this man founded Communio, a journal of theology. One of this man's works titled Dominus Iesus controversially left the filoque clause out of the Nicean creed and appears to imply a belief that salvation can be found outside of the Catholic Church. In Spe Salvi, this man clarified the definition of hope in Catholic theology, and Deus Cartias Est, or \"God is love\" was the title of his first encyclical. He has also condemned the \"Dictatorship of Relativism\" in modern European society. For ten points, name this Bavarian theologian and former Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith who succeeded John Paul II as Pope.", "Pope Benedict XVI", "H"]
["According to the Bah'ai faith, this action was rendered unnecessary by the writing of the Suriy-i-Haykal, which is seen as a metaphorical performance of this task. \"11QT\" or \"11Q19\" are designations given to one of the Dead Sea Scrolls that, among other things, gives instructions on how to perform this task. A man made out of bronze appeared in a vision to one prophet and explained how to perform this action; that vision is recounted in Chapter 40 of Ezekiel, and Zechariah explains that this action will be performed by \"the Branch\". This action is the goal of the organization Revava, and the Mizrak is one of many objects created by a namesake Institute dedicated to performing this action. After this action is performed, one might see the sacrifice of red heifers and the restoration of the privileges of the Cohanim. For ten points, identify this action which, if done now, would probably mean the destruction of the Dome of the Rock and the building of a new Holy of Holies, the revival of a place of worship first built by Solomon.", "Johanan (High Priest)", "H"]
["He, like Moses, supposedly lived to the age of 120, and Yochanan ben Zakkai was said to be this man's youngest student. The sixth Nasi of the Sanhedrin, he held that anyone should be allowed to study Torah. An oft-repeated legend about this man states that, upon being asked to summarize the Torah while standing on one foot, he recited the Golden Rule. On Passover a \"sandwich\" named for this man is eaten. The most famous saying of this man in Pirkei Avot ends with the question \"And if not now, when?\" For 10 points, name this rival of Shammai who currently lends his name to a Jewish student organization present on most college campuses.", "Hillel: The Foundation for Jewish Campus Life", "H"]
["These people believe in a sea monster named Pugwis, as well as in a figure named Bakwas who lives in an invisible house in the woods where the spirits of the drowned live after death. One creature from these people's tradition says \"hu hu!\" and is known as Dzunukwa, the old woman of the forest. These people use items named \"Tlugwe\" at religious ceremonies and some members of this tribe belong to a secret society called the Hamatsa. This tribe was used to refute Lewis Henry Morgan because they appear to be moving from a patrilineal society to a matrilineal society. Their most notable ceremony assigns paramount status to the family who can distribute the most resources. For ten points, name this Native American tribe from Vancouver Island and British Columbia, whose practice of potlatch was studied by Franz Boas.", "Kwakwaka'wakw", "H"]
["This heresy was the subject of the Second Council of Orange, which was moderated by Caesarius of Arles, sometimes called Caesarius of Chalons. Early opponents of this heresy include Cyprian of Toulon. This belief was also condemned at the Council of Diospolis. Julian of Eclanum preached this heresy in Sicily. Durandus of St. Purcain, John Lutterell, and Gregory of Rimini all accused William of Ockham of this heresy due to William's disagreement with Peter Auriole and his five stages of morals in On the Connection of Virtues. St. Paula and St. Jerome founded a school in Bethlehem where the attacked this heresy. The Molinists are associated with a \"semi\" version of this heresy. The founder of this heresy was a Welsh monk and it was vigorously opposed by St. Augustine. For ten points, name this belief that rejects the doctrine of original sin.", "Problem of evil", "H"]
["This deity forbids his followers from engaging in vain and frivolous things, or Laghw. Worshipers of this god contemplate his name during the ceremony of zikr. One story tells how this deity killed the people of Thamud after they hurt an animal he was protecting, while another story tells how this deity punished those who did not follow the advice of Hud. One group who worships this god is called the Motazilites. Other worshipers of this deity use a Misbaha, or a string of prayer beads. Ways of angering this deity include committing the sin of shirk. Uzza, Manat, and Lat may have been considered the three daughters of this deity, who has ninety-nine names and shares his name with an earlier moon god whose symbol was the crescent. For ten points, name this only God of Islam, whose prophet is Muhammad.", "Allah", "H"]
["One of these figures suffered from constant chest pain and was given as a gift to Fuchai, despite the fact that the minister Wu Zixu was alarmed by that figure's beautiful frown. One of these figures disappeared from the Guanwa Palace after helping to defeat the Wu; that figure was rumored to have gone to live with the minister Fan Li on a fishing boat. Another one of these figures would cause fish to kill themselves because they considered themselves unworthy to be in that figure's presence. Another of these assisted Wang Yun in manipulating an adopted son to kill his father, the tyrannical warlord, Dong Zhuo. When another of these was having a portrait painted, her proud and inflexible nature caused the painter to paint a hideous visage, and she was eventually sent, as part of a tribute, to become the wife of Huhanye. Another one of these was forced to become a nun after her father-in-law saw her, and was strangled after her favorite Sogdian Turk launched the An Lushan rebellion. For ten points, give the collective term for Xi Shi, Diaochan, Wang Zhaojun, and Yang Guifei, four females from Chinese folklore who are noted for their attractiveness.", "Four Beauties", "H"]
["The eight chapter of this work warns that \"food will not commend us to God\" and stresses the inefficacy of sacrifice to idols. The fifth chapter of this work contains a metaphor to bread, noting that a single yeast will leaven an entire lump of bread and urges the reader to \"become a new lump\" by not associating with fornicators, especially those who sleep with the wife of their father. Another part of this work states that men should be bareheaded in church. Chapter eleven of this work concerns the Eucharist and has been used to support the doctrine of Transubstantiation, while the fifteenth discusses the resurrection of the dead at the last judgment. This book notably discusses the behavior of women in church, and its sections on love are frequently read at weddings. The introduction to this book berates the titular city for being divided into factions, noting that Christ is one. For ten points, name this first of two letters written to a Greek congregation founded by St. Paul that isn't Thessaly.", "Archibald Robertson (bishop)", "H"]
["A King of Hungary named Peter the Venetian was overthrown by a rebellion of these people, whose earlier leaders in Hungary included Vazul and Kopany. The Swedish king Eric of the Good Harvests belonged to this group of people, as did his father Blot-Sweyn, both of whom were overthrown by Inge the Elder. Orosius wrote seven books of histories against these people, and these people are mentioned in the subtitle of St. Augustine's \"City of God\". This term originally referred to people from the countryside. The \"neo\" form of this group includes the adherents of Romuva, Asatru, and Wicca. For ten points, give this term used to describe pre-Christian religions and those who follow them.", "Pagans", "H"]
["An important image for members of this faith depicts a man with his hands on his very narrow waist. The extended tradition of this religion includes wish-granting trees known as Kalpavrksa. An incantation known as the \"five-fold bow\" or the Namokar is the most important prayer of this religion. The most important text of this religion is called the \"Book of Reality\", though it also had a now-lost text known as the Purvas. The Valabhi Council was a meeting that standardized the scriptures of this faith. This religion divides time into Kalcharkas, or cycles of decline and rise. This religion includes prophets named Arihantas, and the eight gunas are the attributes of those who have achieved kaivalya, where the soul is liberated from matter. Members of this faith are split over whether or not monks should wear clothes. Members of this faith practice ahimsa, or non-violence towards all living creatures. For ten points, name this pacifist, vegetarian religion of India.", "Jainism", "H"]
["An apocryphal book features this man's apoctalyptic prophecies, and is accepted as canonical by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church. This son of Seraiah was said to have founded the Great Assembly, and he railed against Israelites who have \"trespassed by bringing home foreign women.\" He worked during the reign of one of the two Artaxerxes, and his namesake book describes the return under Zerubabel and the building of the Second Temple. The practice of reading Torah in services was implemented under this man, who led the second group of Israelites back from Babylon to Jerusalem. For ten points, name this Ancient Hebrew scribe and priestly contemporary of Nehemiah.", "Djelal Kadir", "H"]
["One concept mentioned in this statement is subdivided into sankhara and viparinama varieties and is contrasted with its opposite, sukkha, in the metaphor of the spinning potter's wheel. Apart from Dukkha, this statement also addresses an idea linked to Upadana and known as Tanha, which cases Dukkha and, by extension, the cycle of punarbhava. However, this statement ends by noting that nirvana can be achieved though the cessation of desires, bringing an end to the suffering that marks life if one follows the Eight Fold Path. For ten points, name these things realized by the Buddha when he reached enlightenment under a tree and the subject of his first sermon, a brief, numbered set of fundamental Buddhist beliefs.", "Four Noble Truths", "H"]
["This text calls its readers to sewa, or serving others. This work contains hymns called the Sohila, which are recited at bedtime, and a large section is known known as the Japji. The most important parts of this work are collectively known as the bani. This text is organized on the basis of ragas, or musical scales, one of which is assigned to each chapter. Another part of this work is known as the Mul, which contains its main teachings. Angad created a special script for the writing of this text, known as the Gurmukhi. At Goindval, one can find a facility where old copies of this text are ceremoniously cremated. This text became foremost among the Khalsa Panth on the declaration of Gobind, who made this book his successor in an office first held by Nanak. For ten points, name this current guru of Sikhism, a book that is the religion's central text.", "Bilaval", "H"]
["An image of this figure was carved upon the rock Coddinus by Broteas, a son of Tantalus, and this figure is often associated with a son of Nana. Called Dindymene by the Greeks, this figure was often depicted in art as wearing a turret-like crown. Worship of this figure was the subject of the Megalesian games in Rome, and this figure was often referred to as \"Idaean\" after a mountain in Asia Minor. This figure's followers were called the galli, and this figure's cult became very important during the rule of Augustus, who restored this figure's temple, which was next to his own palace on the Palatine. This figure's cult was brought to Rome from Pessinus during the Second Punic War as a black stone according to the Sibylline books. Ovid states that Atalanta and Hippomenes had sex in a temple of this goddess, were turned into lions, and later had to pull her chariot. Originally a Phrygian goddess representing the earth's fertility, FTP, name this goddess and consort of Attis, whose followers were self-castrated youths and who represented the Earth Mother", "Cybele", "H"]
["K.D. Sethna has argued that the word \"Ranha\" in Zoroastrian texts refers to this place. According to the Story of King Sagar, the Vedic sage Kapiladeva makes his abode in this place. Ucchaisrava was a white horse who emerged from this place, along with Kaustubhamani the diamond, Dhanvantari the physician of the gods, and Sura the goddess of wine. Kurma was an avatar of Vishnu whose abode was in this place. The monster Makara dwells in this place. The story of Sagar Manthan tells of Vasuki, a king of the nagas who lives in one of these places, and how a mountain was taken to one of these places in order to turn it into amrita, the immortality nectar of the gods. For ten points, Varuna is the god of this place, a large body of salt water.", "Sea", "H"]
["When introducing this doctrine, its most famous adherent warned that attempting to understand it quickly would be like entering an \"inextricable labyrinth\" before supporting this doctrine by citing St. Bernard's sermons on the Song of Solomon. Romans 9 and Romans 11 are often cited to support this doctrine, but they are directly contradicted by Romans 10. The term \"God behind the cross\" has been coined to describe the unknowable aspects of this doctrine. Pslam 78, which contrasts the tribe of Ephraim with the tribe of Judah, has been used to support the \"double\" form of this doctrine. This doctrine was the subject of the Quinquarticular Controversy, during which it was defended by Franciscus Gomarus, and a dispute over this doctrine led to the Synod of Dordt, where this doctrine was attacked by Jacobus Arminius. For ten points, name this doctrine laid forth in Institutes of the Christian Religion, which states that God foreordained some to be damned and elected others to be saved, associated with orthodox Calvinism.", "Predestination", "H"]
["One major work of this movement contains chapters titled A Section with no Heading and A Key to the Revelation of St. John, and some have traced this movement to a work of Solomon Spalding. One leader of this movement delivered the \"Salt Sermon\", which attacked Oliver Cowdery, an early leader of this movement who had formed a splinter group, and other early leaders include Frederick Williams and Sidney Rigdon. The views of this movement are summarized in a letter to \"Long John\" Wentworth known as the Articles of Faith. Some have traced this movement to a work of Ethan Smith titled View of the Hebrews. Texts from this religious movement include the Book of Commandments and the Book of Abraham, which is part of the Pearl of Great Price. For ten points, name this branch of Christianity based on writings found at Cumorah on golden plates by Joseph Smith.", "Mormonism", "H"]
["Among the natives of the Philippines, a phenomenon similar to this one is known as \"Usog\". Among the Zoroastrians, this phenomenon is known as \"Bla Band\". Peter Walcot published an extensive 1978 study of this phenomenon among the Greeks, who call it \"vaskania.\" This phenomenon is alluded to in Verse 5 of Sura 113, known as the al-Falaq Sura, and among the Turks the Nazar amulet is said to prevent this phenomenon. Among other Muslims, a symbol named for the daughter of Muhammad, Fatima, is used to prevent this. Among the Jews it is believed that fish are immune to this phenomenon, and some Jews seek to prevent this phenomenon by using the Hamsa symbol, also known as the Hand of Miriam. This phenomenon is believed to occur when one person is envious of another and may be involuntary. For ten points, name this alleged ability of some people to place a curse on somebody just by looking at them.", "Zisurr\u00fb", "H"]
["Many figures in this work debate Sariputra, who is depicted as unable to grasp sophisticated concepts. A suspended treasure tower and the emergence of old disciples from the Earth are described in the \"Ceremony of the Air\". Early in this work, there is a dialog between the royal prince Mangusri and the Bodhisattva Maitreya regarding a beam of light that has emerged from between the Buddha's eyebrows while he was delivering a speech to his followers. This work also contains the \"Parable of the Burning House\", while in the final chapter of this work, entitled \"The Teacher of the Law\", the Buddha states that this work is superior to all of his previous teachings, though this work was written over 500 years after the Buddha's death. In the 13th century, a sect of Buddhism based entirely on this work was founded by Nichiren. For ten points, name this Mahayana sutra named for a type of flower.", "Lotus Sutra", "H"]
["This relic was saved from destruction when a woman hid it in her hair and took it to a shrine while dressed as a member of the nobility, apparently to explain the strange hairstyle. A man from Udeni named Dantha once traveled to worship this object, favorably impressing the local king, who married Dantha to his daughter. That King, Paandu, had earlier ordered this object destroyed, but its miraculous power convinced him to convert, after which he defeated the villainous King Ksheeradara. Some claim that this relic is currently inside of a monument known as the Shari Den in a complex built by Hojo Tokimune to celebrate the defeat of the Mongols in the city of Kamakura. It once belonged to the rulers of Kalinga, who received it from Khema, an arhat who removed it from a funeral pyre. Most agree it is now at the Sri Dalada Maligawa shrine in Kandy, Sri Lanka. For ten points, name this relic that once resided in the mouth of Siddhartha Gautama and helped him eat.", "Relic of the tooth of the Buddha", "H"]
["The terms \"Mosque of Banner Holders\" and \"Crown of Mosques\" are nicknames for this city's Amr Ibn El-Aas Mosque, which was built by a general who captured this city, while an Abbasid governor of this city built the Ibn Tulun mosque. It is home to the Ben Ezra Synagogue, in whose storeroom 200,000 Hebrew manuscripts were discovered in the 19th century. This city was built on an earlier settlement named Fustat, and it was one of the cities occupied by the Ottomans after the Battle of Al-Ridaneah. This city's Qala Square is home to the Sultan Hassan Complex, which contains a mosque, madrasa, and mausoleum. One of the oldest universities in the world was founded at this city's Al-Azhar Mosque. With an Arabic name meaning \"the subduer\", it is nicknamed the \"City of One Thousand Minarets\", and it was the capital of such rulers as Sultan Qutuz, Sultan Baybars, and the Shi'te Caliphs of the Fatimid Empire. For ten points, name this capital city of Egypt.", "Cairo", "H"]
["One of these beings is considered the opposite of druj and is named Asha. One of these beings is called Ksharthra, which translates as \"dominion\", though that being is also known as Shahrevar and is associated with metals or minerals. Herodotus said that one of these beings named Haurvatat was the same as Plutus, the Greek god of riches, though Haurvatat is more commonly associated with health and wholeness. The Greek name \"Mnemon\" may originate from one of these beings who was associated with cattle. One of these beings has an enemy named Shud, who is the demon of hunger. That being, Ameretat, is the representation of immortality and life. These beings are mentioned in the Yasnas, where many hymns are dedicated to them. Together, these beings are called the \"six noble sparks\". For ten points, name this group of immortal good beings in Zoroastrianism, whose leader is Ahura Mazda.", "Amesha Spenta", "H"]
["On its official website, this denomination proudly claims that Johnny Appleseed was one of its adherents. This denomination's belief that Africans are more capable of acknowledging truth than other races led many of its members to be abolitionists in the United States and apartheid opponents in South Africa. Adherents of this denomination believe that marriage is eternal, and that those who die unmarried will find a spouse in heaven, and they also believe that Jesus moved from being both human and divine to being all divine as his divine soul went through a process of removing human imperfection. The founder of this denomination, who wrote Apocalypsis Revelata and Heavenly Secrets, claimed to have the ability to visit heaven and hell any time he wanted, and wrote a book describing both places, as well as other texts known as this denomination's Third Testament. For ten points, name this branch of Christianity named for an eccentric 17th century Swedish theologian.", "Swedenborgian Church of North America", "H"]
["Karaites always celebrate this holiday on Sunday, and one tradition holds that King David was born and died on this day. A tradition is to study all night on this day, while others include the decoration of houses of worship and homes with flowers and the eating of a dairy meal. A poem by Meir of Worms, the Akdamut, is read on this day, as is the book of Ruth. Also known as the Closing festival, the Festival of Reaping, and the Day of the First Fruits, for ten points, name this second of the three Jewish harvest holidays, celebrating the giving of the Ten Commandments, which occurs 50 days after the end of Passover.", "Pentecost", "H"]
["This denomination's founder created a namesake \"Quadrilateral\" methodology for understanding the four sources of theology. An early leader of this movement, who later broke with it, was George Whitefield. This denomination's founder wrote a notable \"Covenant Prayer\", and this denomination's liturgical calendar uniquely contains a period called \"Kingdomtide\", which preceeds Advent. This denomination takes a prevenient view of God's grace, which they view as a gift that is always available but can be refused, a doctrine taken from Jacobus Arminius, and they also believe in the continuous action of the Holy Spirit on the believer's soul, and the need for rebirth in belief, though a similar group they practice infant baptism. For ten points, name this evangelical Protestant denomination founded by Charles and John Wesley.", "List of clergy educated at Jesus College, Oxford", "H"]
["In 1577, Christopher Rasperger wrote a book with more than 200 potential interpretations of this concept. Both the Unitas Fratrum and the Taborites denied it, and a major English opponent of it was John Tillotson. Its scriptural justification is drawn from John 6 and 1 Corinthians 11, and Ignatius of Antioch defended it in a letter to the Smyrnaeans. Rejected in the Thirty-Nine Articles of 1563, its most recent confirmation was published by Pope Paul VI in his 1965 encyclical Mysterium fidei, 750 years after its formal exposition in 1215 at the Fourth Lateran Council. For ten points, what is this Catholic doctrine that the Eucharist sees the transformation of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ?", "Transubstantiation", "H"]
["One of its namesake texts is the samgraha sastra by Asanga, and represents the Yogachara school of this teaching. Its only definitive sutra of Chinese-origin is the Platform Sutra, and some of its early texts may be traced to the Kushan empire monk Lokaksema. Containing the Sutra of Perfect Wisdom, it emphasizes the central role of karuna in the path to wisdom and formulates a doctrine of the \"Three Bodies.\" Its teaching of universal endowment with Buddha nature and transmission of excess merit explains why it disfavors those who manage to escape samsara, and prefers bodhisattvas instead. FTP, name this branch of Buddhism with a name literally meaning \"The Greater Ox-Cart,\" often opposed to Theravada.", "Mahayana", "H"]
["Usually included in this man's collected works are his letters to Count Toreno on a common subject. He proposed a choice between conflicting Christian religions in \"Not Paul, but Jesus,\" a work written under the name Gamaliel Smith and edited by Francis Place. He discussed certain Anarchical Fallacies in a work by that name, and hired Edwin Chadwick as a secretary late in life, long after more adventurous works like Auto-Icon; Or, Farther Uses of the Dead to the Living and his treatise on education Chrestomathia. He's better known for proposing pain and pleasure as sovereign masters of the body in Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. An advocate of the \"greatest happiness for the greatest number,\" FTP, name this English founder of utilitarianism.", "Jeremy Bentham", "H"]
["One lesser branch of this group was known as the Dragovitsians, while another was called the Patarenes. The only prayer recited by its members was \"Our Father,\" recited 120 times per day, and trained an elite caste known as \"the Elect.\" Their leader was condemnded by Nicholas III, and this group had its origin in a community of Armenians originally brought to Philipopolis by John Tzimisces. Theologically related to the Cathars, they believed that the world had been created by Satan, God's eldest son, and that Jesus entered Mary through the ear. Rejecting Christ's miracles and infamous for their orgies, for ten points, identify this group of dualist heretics led by Basil the Physician, eradicated in the Byzantine empire and Bulgaria in the thirteenth century.", "Bogomilism", "H"]
["This man's Chandi di Var is a poetic composition about an aspect of the goddess Durga, and its first stanza forms the first part of the ardaas. He called any who would die for their faith into a tent, after which he emerged holding a sword dripping with blood. The men were not killed and the event formed the basis for the Amrit ceremony, after which adherents are called khalsa, for those \"five beloved\" men. His father, Teg Bahadur, sacrificed himself up to the current Mughal emperor, Aurangzeb, after which this man succeeded him and compiled the Dasam Granth. He declared that the Guru Granth Sahib would be the ultimate and last guru, but, FTP, name this 10th and final human guru of Sikhism.", "Guru Gobind Singh", "H"]
["Martin Noth conjectured that it was the second of five historical works written by an author known as D. In its seventh chapter, the thief Achan was stoned in the valley of Achor. It ends with the burial of Eleazar next to his son and the bones of Joseph at Shechem, where were brought safely back from Egypt, and its chapter 24, verse 20 contains its namesake's famous farewell address. Its famous episode was preceded by an encounter with the Commander of the Lord's army in which the title figure took off his sandals, and it mentions that the Book of Jasher also recounted the event in which the moon stopped in the Valley of Aijalon and the sun stopped over Gibeon so that God gave the Israelites victory over the five kings. FTP, name this Old Testament book that saw the conquest of Canaan, including the Battle of Jericho.", "Book of Joshua", "H"]
["Animals that show evidence of this include European bisons and northern elephant seals, and it is thought to have occurred in giant pandas about 43,000 years ago. Because of this effect, skin grafts from one cheetah to another do not create an immune response. A variant that occurs when a small group separates from the rest of a population, resulting in increased genetic drift and inbreeding, is called the founder effect. FTP, name this evolutionary event in which a significant percentage of the population or species is killed or unable to reproduce, resulting in a population reduction of 50% or more.", "Population bottleneck", "H"]
["It was frequently persecuted by Melchites for its adherence to a Cyrilline Christology, and in 2001 Peter VII agreed to recognize its marriages and baptisms. The only pre-reformation church to use grape juice in communion, it is currently led by Shenouda III, and it traces its origin to the condemnation of Patriarch Dioscorus at the Council of Chalcedon. In communion with the Armenian Church and the other members of the Oriental Orthodox Communion, it granted autocephality to the Tawahedo Ethiopian church in 1959, and performs most of its liturgical rites in an extinct afro-asiatic language. For ten points identify this so-called monophysite church, centered in Alexandria, named for the dialect of Egyptian it uses in services.", "Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria", "H"]
["This thinker discusses his political views in The Socialist Decision, and often described himself as \"living on the boundary,\" the title of his autobiography. He attempts an ontological analysis in Love, Power, and Justice and his major early works include The Interpretation of History and The Protestant Era. He posits reality as the interplay of finite and infinite, and discusses the problem of anxiety resulting from mankind's existential estrangement in his tome The Courage to Be. But he's best known for a three-volume work in which he advocates symbols of faith and God as the ground \u25baof being, Systematic Theology. FTP, name this German theologian invited to teach at UTS by Reinhold Niebuhr.", "Paul Tillich", "H"]
["This work has been notably translated by Koun Yamada. A student named Amban added his own section to it in which he derisively likened its creator to a doughnut-seller forcing people to eat. Wu-liang Tsung-shou also supplemented it with three verses composed in gratitude. Often paired with another major work, the Blue Cliff Record, it was published with commentary by Mumon Ekai or Wumen in the early 13th century and compiled a total of 48 cases including \"Nansen \u25baCuts the Cat in Two\" and \"Joshu's dog.\" FTP, name this collection of Zen koans whose title seems to be a contradictory phrase about a structure which can let you in or keep you out.", "The Gateless Gate", "H"]
["This man composed a treatise against Hermogenes, a Greek painter who led a materialist cult, and a treatise against Praxeas, wherein he put forth his concept of the Trinity. He may have borrowed from the dialogue Octavius, written by his contemporary Minucius Felix, in composing his major work, the Apologeticum. He converted to Montanism and defended that belief throughout his life, though Augustine insists he returned to orthodoxy before his death, and he was succeeded by Cyprian. FTP, name this \u25baphilosopher and early father of the Latin Church from Carthage.", "Tertullian", "H"]
["This man composed a treatise against Hermogenes, a Greek painter who led a materialist cult, and a treatise against Praxeas, wherein he put forth his concept of the Trinity. He may have borrowed from the dialogue Octavius, written by his contemporary Minucius Felix, in composing his major work, the Apologeticum. He converted to Montanism and defended that belief throughout his life, though Augustine insists he returned to orthodoxy before his death, and he was succeeded by Cyprian. FTP, name this \u25baphilosopher and early father of the Latin Church from Carthage.", "Tertullian", "H"]
["This man published the pamphlet Mars Gallicus as a scathing attack on contemporary French policy. A lesser known figure of the same name was a delegate to the Council of Trent probably best known for an exegetical piece entitled Concordia Evangelica. The more famous one completed his landmark treatise Augustinus months before his death after having been appointed Bishop of Ypres, but is best remembered for inspiring the community of Port Royal and men like \u25baAntoine Arnauld as the namesake of a 17th century religious movement. FTP, name this Flemish theologian.", "Cornelius Jansen", "H"]
["This man published the pamphlet Mars Gallicus as a scathing attack on contemporary French policy. A lesser known figure of the same name was a delegate to the Council of Trent probably best known for an exegetical piece entitled Concordia Evangelica. The more famous one completed his landmark treatise Augustinus months before his death after having been appointed Bishop of Ypres, but is best remembered for inspiring the community of Port Royal and men like \u25baAntoine Arnauld as the namesake of a 17th century religious movement. FTP, name this Flemish theologian.", "Cornelius Jansen", "H"]
["This concept is the subject of books by Phillip Park, who discussed its success and failure, and Thomas Belke who wrote a \"Christian study\" of it. Described in the speech \"On Eliminating Dogmatism and Formalism,\" it embraces chawi, charip, and chaju and its adopted calendar begins on April 15, 1912. Most generally, it promotes economic self-sufficiency, independent foreign policy, and a \"spirit of self-reliance,\" which is often its translation. Incorporated into the \u25bamilitary Songun policy, it was gradually severed from its Marxist roots by its formulator Kim il Sung. FTP, name this official state ideology of North Korea.", "Juche", "H"]
["This system's chief objective of autarkeia is open to wide interpretation, as is its chief virtue, anaideia, but the means for attaining them, askesis, is well-defined. Sayre argues that this sect did not arise until the second century BCE but it claims descent from Socrates. Seeking a \"natural life\" by \"defacing the currency\" through parrhesia, this philosophy's practitioners valued shamelessness and self-sufficiency over all else and the shocking qualities of their lectures led to their being labeled as barking \"dogs.\" FTP, name this school of philosophy usually considered to have been founded Antisthenes, who claimed that \"nothing exists,\" but which is best exemplified by Diogenes of Sinope.", "Cynic", "H"]
["The originator of this legend may have been Heliodorus, the chancellor of Seleucus IV Philopatorm, who was prevented by the priest Onias from looting the Temple. A similar story from a cuneiform tablet lends veracity to this legend, which is set during the years following the victory at Carchemish by Nebuchadnezzar. Three Talmudic units of weight, the peras, shekel, and mina, have been hypothesized to be represented. After \"the gods of gold and silver, bronze, iron, wood, and stone\" are praised at a banquet, the central event occurs and the inability to vocalize three verbs meaning \"to count,\" \"to weigh,\" and \"to divide\" render an inscription undecipherable. Depicted in the fifth chapter of Daniel, this is, FTP, what harbinger that, according to the prophet, foretold the downfall of King Belshazzar of Babylon?", "Belshazzar's feast", "H"]
["While attending a feast hosted by Cybele on Mt. Ida, this deity fell asleep and was nearly violated by Priapus, but the braying of an ass woke her up and saved her. Considered both the youngest and oldest of the gods, since Cronus swallowed her first and disgorged her last, she caused a great rift between Apollo and Poseidon when she was asked by both of them to be their bride. But she refused both of them, taking a vow in front of her brother Zeus to remain pure. FTP, name this goddess whose symbol was the circle whose duties included tending the sacred fire on Mt. Olympus.", "Hestia", "H"]
["It was said to be the model of the android Hadaly in Villiers de L'Isle-Adam's Tomorrow's Eve and the first paper written on it was by Antoine Quatremere. A tabletop replica of this work is the object of admiration in Honore Daumier's The Connossieur. Its missing plinth was depicted in a drawing by Auguste Debay; this helped classify this work as Hellenistic rather than Classical, as believed by Louis Forbin, the director of the Louvre at the time of its discovery. Due to the efforts of Adolf Furtwangler, who conjectured that this statue originally held a golden apple, it is now believed to have been sculpted by Alexandros of Antioch. FTP, identify this statue discovered on an Aegean island by a Greek farmer and easily recognized due to its missing arms.", "Venus de Milo", "H"]
["This person is sometimes pictured with a dog's head but de Voragine holds that he was a Canaanite ogre named Reprobus who left the employ of the devil upon seeing his master afraid. Tradition holds that he was martyred by Decius but apparent inconsistencies in his story drew Erasmus' especial ire for his venerators. The most famous incident in his life occurred while he was aiding a child, when that child proved extremely heavy because he was bearing the sins of the world; Christ, whom he was carrying across a river at the time, then immediately baptized him. FTP, name this Saint, the Patron of travelers and motorists, whose name literally means \"Christ-bearer.\"", "Saint Christopher", "H"]
["Green, red, yellow, white, and blue make-up the symbolic star of this faith; these colors represent the five ministers that govern it. Members in Syria are known as Jabal and believe in the divine unity of humanity and reincarnation. A namesake revolt in 1925 resulted in the exile of its leaders to Palmyra, although this was ended two years later. Knowledge of the Kitab-al-hikma is restricted to those who have made the passage from juhhal to uqqal, from \"ignorant\" or \"knower.\" It is likely that the object of their worship is the former Fatimid caliph al-Hakim. FTP, name this highly secretive sect of Islam which derives its name from that of a forerunner of the community, Muhammad al-Durazi.", "Druze", "H"]
["Schopenhauer invokes this work's fable of Meshian and Meshiane as emblematic of the source of the pessimistic element of Christian religion. The story of a man to whom is given a \"golden seal and a dagger inlaid with gold,\" Yima, is included in the second fragment of the third part, the name of which translates as \"Against the Demons\" and is Videvdat. Its oldest section, 72 chapters of \"oblations,\" includes the original writing of this work's compiler; chapters 28 through 53 of this section, part of the Yasna, are gathas in honor of Zarathustra. FTP, name this sacred text of Zoroastrianism which is often paired with commentaries known as Zend.", "Avesta", "H"]
["Henri Hubert outlined a general theory of this practice of which fifteen different varieties were identified among the Trobriand Islanders by Bronislaw Malinowski. Edward Evans-Pritchard cited as an example the falling of an Azande roof and their inability to establish a causal relationship to termites. In The Golden Bough, James Frazer conjectured that civilizations are characterized by a stage during which this is prominent before moving to religion and then science. Believed by Lucien Levy-Bruhl to be characteristic of pre-logical thought and considered for Coral Gardens by Malinowski, this is, FTP, what is practice of invoking the supernatural?", "Magic", "H"]
["The last chapter of this book contains greetings to Andronicus and Junias, the author's relatives, and a greeting from Tertius, who transcribed it. Chapter eleven compares the audience to broken shoots being grafted onto a tree. Although chapter two is cited to support salvation by virtue, verses such as 10:13, \"Whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved,\" seem to support salvation by faith alone. Its most popular verses include 3:23, \"For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God;\" and 6:23, \"For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life.\" FTP, name this book of the New Testament, the longest of Paul's epistles, which he addressed to a church in Italy.", "Charles Terrot", "H"]
["According to the Old Testament, this name meaning \"waterless hill\" was used by the pre-Hebrew inhabitants of Jerusalem for the city. Its namesake tribe was the last conquered by Israel in Canaan and may have been the origin of such figures as Nathan and Zadok. More recently, someone by this name failed to respond to entreaties on a shortwave radio and the person behind that attempt declared non-belief in this entity when forced into missionary work to escape from a debt to the PBS pledge drive. FTP, name this botched pronunciation of the name of a major religious figure prayed to by Homer Simpson.", "Jebus", "H"]
