Result: 1 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Berkeley A + Columbia B + South Carolina A + McMaster A | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 60205

Question: In Book IX of the Iliad, Phoenix tells this man's story as a cautionary tale to inspire Achilles to rejoin the fight. This man's daughter with his wife Cleopatra married a man who was the first to die in the Trojan War. Following this hero's death, his sisters Eurymede and Melanippe were turned into guineafowl. During an effort led by this hero, Nestor spear-vaulted away to safety and Ancaeus was mortally wounded. This hero's mother killed herself in grief after she killed this hero by burning a log that the Fates had tied to his lifespan. That filicide transpired as a result of this man's murder of his uncles, Toxeus and Plexippus, who had objected to him awarding a hunting prize to Atalanta. For 10 points, name this son of Althaea and Oeneus who led the Calydonian Boar Hunt.

ANSWER: Meleager

Result: 2 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Columbia A + VCU A | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 60226

Question: In his first appearance, this figure's "womanly hair" is compared to that of Nisaba, the goddess of corn. After only ever drinking milk from animals, this figure's first encounter with alcohol ends with him drinking seven full goblets of wine. This figure finds that he can no longer chase gazelle after spending six days and seven nights sleeping with a harlot. This figure's arrival is presaged by dreams of a falling meteorite and of an axe that won't budge. After this figure's death, his companion seeks out of a plant to renew his youth at the bottom of the ocean on the advice of the flood survivor Utnapishtim. This man is cursed to die after he aids his more famous companion in defeating the Guardian of the Cedar Forest and the Bull of Heaven. For 10 points, name this Mesopotamian wild man, the bosomcompanion of Gilgamesh.

ANSWER: Enkidu

Result: 3 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Dartmouth + Florida B | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 60239

Question: While trying to pull this figure out of a fire, Agnar's brother accidentally stumbles and impales himself on his sword. This figure instructs a hero to dig multiple trenches in order to collect all of Fafnir's blood. A series of statements attributed to this god comprise the Hávamál. This god is accidentally tortured by Geirröth in the Grímnismál. This god fled in the form of an eagle after obtaining three sips of a beverage in exchange for three nights of sex with Suttung's daughter, Gunnlöd. This god outwits Vafthrudnir, and asks a seeress to relay the events of Ragnarök to him in the Völuspá. This god stole the mead of poetry, hung himself from a branch of Yggdrasil, and drank from the well of Mimir, for which he gave up one of his eyes. For 10 points, name this "All-Father" of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Odin [or Othin; accept Grimnir until mention of Grimnismal]

Result: 4 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Duke A + UCF A + Northwestern | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 60263

Question: One of this god's children was known as the "great runner," and shared his name with a blue-skinned male fertility god that was typically shown with a potbelly and large, sagging breasts. Some depictions of this god as a child show him clutching scorpions and snakes, while other depictions show him raising a crooked finger to his lip. This god won an eighty year-long feud by painting his opponent's stone boat in the likeness of wood, allowing this god to easily win the race. The four cardinal directions were represented by this god's sons, who served as guardians of the canopic jars. This deity was symbolized by an object that was treated with milk after being wounded in a fight against Set, the wedjat eye. For 10 points, name this son of Isis and Osiris, the falcon-headed Egyptian god of the sky.

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 5 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Editors Packet 1 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 60286

Question: In the Mabinogion, a giant warns a cousin of King Arthur that it is not possible to perform this action unless the blood of the Very Black Witch from Pennant Gofid is kept warm in the bottles of Gwyddolwyn ["gwuh-THOLwin"]. That giant is later subjected to this action after the hound Drudwyn is used to acquire some objects between the ears of the boar Twrch Trwyth ["toorch true-ith"]. Minos was able to capture Megara after a princess of that city betrayed her father by performing this action on Nisus. In the Skaldskaparmal, Loki atones for this action by having the Sons of Ivaldi forge an object made of gold to give to Thor's wife Sif. For 10 points, name this action which Delilah performed on Samson in order to weaken him

ANSWER: cutting hair [or giving a haircut; accept cutting a beard or shaving]

Result: 6 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Editors Packet 2 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 60310

Question: The bounty on one of these creatures' heads was the hand of Euaechme in marriage. That creature's eventual killer was made king of Megara and received aid from Apollo in restoring the city's walls. Idmon and Aristaeus were conceived after Apollo saw their mother Cyrene wrestling one of these creatures. Molorchus promised to sacrifice a ram if another of these creatures was slain within thirty days. That creature of this type was defeated when its eventual slayer blocked off one entrance to its cave, and then stunned it with a powerful swing of his club. After slaying that animal of this type, its killer fashioned its impenetrable hide into a cloak and returned to the court of Eurystheus for eleven more tasks. For 10 points, name this type of animal killed by Heracles just outside of Nemea.

ANSWER: lions [accept the "Cithaeronian lion" or the "Nemean lion"]

Result: 7 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Georgia + MSU + Cornell B + WUSTL A | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 60321

Question: At the end of Book XI of the Odyssey, the possibility of seeing one of these objects prompts Odysseus to flee from the realm of the dead. One of these objects led to the demise of Aconteus, Astyages, and nearly two hundred other men. A member of the Seven Against Thebes named Tydeus was denied immortality when Athena spotted him eating a part of one of these objects. One of these objects made a racket after the Maenads set it afloat towards the island of Lesbos. Another one of these objects was safely stored in a kibisis. Fifty of these objects belonged to each of the Hecatonchires. The removal of another of these objects spawned Chrysaor and Pegasus. For 10 points, name these body parts that include a snake-covered one with powers of petrification that belonged to Medusa.

ANSWER: heads [accept brain; accept "Medusa's head" or "Orion's head]

Result: 8 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Georgia Tech + Maryland B | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 60355

Question: A group of reeds warn this woman not to ford a river until the sun begins to set. At a banquet, this woman refuses a comfortable seat, and instead only eats bread. This woman's sisters simultaneously jump off a cliff and die with the wrongheaded expectation that Zephyr would catch them for a second time. A voice from inside a tower dissuades this person from committing suicide, and instead instructs her how to reach the palace of Proserpina. This woman is rewarded with a burnt piece of bread after a group of ants help her sort several types of grains into different piles. According to The Golden Ass, this woman's curiosity leads her to accidentally spill lamp oil on her future husband while he is asleep, forcing her to submit to Venus for several trials. For 10 points, name this woman who marries Cupid.

ANSWER: Psyche

Result: 9 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Maryland A + Berkeley B | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 60416

Question: The Tahitian god Ta'aroa lived in one of these objects until he got bored and created the world. The Brahmanda Purana describes a golden one of these objects synonymous with Brahma called the Hiranyagarbha. In Pelasgian myth, Ophion coiled seven times around one of these objects created by Eurynome. One of these objects containing a needle is hidden inside of a duck, inside of a hare, inside of a chest, and contains the soul of Koschei the Deathless. In Chinese myth, an axe was used to break one of these objects by Pangu, and Sun Wukong emerged from one made of stone. The wife of Tyndareus produced two of these objects that contained Castor, Pollux, Clytemnestra, and Helen after being raped by Zeus in the form of a swan. For 10 points, Leda's children hatched from what sort of object?

ANSWER: eggs

Result: 10 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: McGill A + Louisville + Yale B + Florida A | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 60430

Question: In the Mahabharata, Vibhishana removed this property from the followers of Ravana. It's not indestructibility, but "starving skeletons" named gashadokuro that roamed the countryside had this power. Caradog dies of shock while observing Caswallawn employing this power, which was also granted by the mantle of King Arthur. In the Nibelungenlied, Alberich bestows a non-ring item upon Siegfried that grants him this power. Autolycus owned a helmet that granted him this power. Another item granting this power was used by Athena during the Trojan War to cause injury to Ares and by Hermes in his fight with Hippolytus. For 10 points, name this ability granted by that aforementioned cap belonging to Hades, which allowed Perseus to enter and escape the lair of the Gorgons unseen.

ANSWER: invisibility [accept equivalents or other word forms; make sure to NOT accept "invincibility"]

Result: 11 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Michigan A + Georgetown A | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 60464

Question: Book 7 of the Denkard recounts how King Vishtaspa was converted when Zoroaster healed one of these creatures which had become paralyzed. A ritual involving one of these animals could provoke war if it was killed while wandering around nearby lands with a trail of warriors behind it. That sacrifice ritual involving this animal was known as the Ashvamedha. Along with Channa, one of these animals was present during the witnessing of the Four Sights. That one of these animals, Kanthaka, was then abandoned after Buddha chose a spiritual life. 7 of them draw Surya across the sky. White, red, black, and pale examples of these animals feature in the Book of Revelation. For 10 points, name this animal that bears owned War, Famine, Pestilence, and Death during the Apocalypse.

ANSWER: horse

Result: 12 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Michigan A + Georgetown A | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 60467

Question: This figure won a maiden's hand in marriage and the accompanying dowry of ninety million horses after defeating seven bulls in combat. In the Mausala Parva, this figure transforms a piece of grass into an iron club and uses it to beat up a bunch of foes, but later dies of an arrow wound after he is mistaken for a deer by the hunter Jiru. As a child, this figure killed a demoness by nursing her to death, balanced a mountain on his little finger, and danced on the hood of a multi-headed cobra. This god seduced the gopi Radha, and declared: "I am destroyer of all the worlds" while serving as a charioteer in the Bhagavad-Gita. For 10 points, name this eighth avatar of Vishnu, a blue-skinned Hindu deity served as the charioteer of Arjuna.

ANSWER: Krishna [prompt on Vishnu]

Result: 13 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: MIT A + Johns Hopkins B | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 60361

Question: The appearance of one of these creatures prevented Auge from striking down her lost son Telephus. A person with the lower half of one of these creatures was succeeded as king by Cranaus, and served as judge during a race that ended with the planting of an olive tree. Herse, Aglaurus and Pandrosus jumped to their deaths from the Acropolis after they opened a box containing baby Erichthonius and one of these creatures. Calchas prophesied that Troy would fall ten years after one of these animals devoured a bird and its chicks. After interrupting a copulating pair of these creatures, Tiresias was transformed into a woman. Two of these creatures are entwined around the caduceus staff belonging to Hermes. For 10 points, name these animals that include one slain at Delphi by Apollo named Python.

ANSWER: snakes [or serpents]

Result: 14 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Oklahoma + Brown | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 60524

Question: In the first story from this collection, a prince who stole a kill from a pack of white, red-eared hounds must defeat Hafgan with exactly one blow. A story from this collection tells of a man who kills a hundred soldiers hidden in bags of flour hung from the columns of a house after earlier offending Matholwch ["MATH-oll-ooch"]. A widely read translation of this text was made by Sioned Davies, though it was first translated by Lady Charlotte Guest. A woman in this work is framed for the murder of her son after her maidens smear dog blood on her face, and later marries Manawydan fab Llyr. The only character to appear in all four "Branches" of this collection is Rhiannon's son Pryderi. For 10 points, name this collection of tales from Welsh mythology and folklore.

ANSWER: The Mabinogion

Result: 15 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Oxford A + Maryland C | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 60565

Question: This god tasked a turtle, a mermaid, and a whale with building an ocean-spanning bridge to aid the god of wind in bringing music to mankind. This god climbed down a spider web from the land of Tula to oust his brother. By decapitating a pair of flood survivors and gluing their heads to their behinds, this god created the first dogs. In his jaguar form, this god lived in the center of a mountain. This god kidnapped a goddess of butterflies and flowers from her rain god husband Tlaloc. During the creation of the world, the earth was created from the body of a primordial sea monster named Cipactli that bit off this god's foot, which was then replaced with a slab of black obsidian. For 10 points, name this malevolent Aztec god, the brother of Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca

Result: 16 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: UTK A + Ilinois A + Princeton | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 60588

Question: A thin blanket of mist sent by Poseidon saved the conjoined twins Eurytus and Cteatus from this man's wrath. Telemachus is accompanied by one of this man's sons on a visit to the abode of Menelaus and Helen, while another of this man's sons sacrifices himself to protect this man from Memnon. The shapeshifting Periclymenus was among this man's many siblings to be killed by Heracles, who also slew this man's father Neleus. This father of Peisistratus and Antilochus didn't pillage at all after the fall of Troy, so his ships were the only ones to safely return to his native Pylos. This "Gerenian horseman" rarely uses his solid golden shield, instead putting his efforts into mediating between Agamemnon and Achilles. For 10 points, name this wise old king from the Iliad and the Odyssey.

ANSWER: Nestor

Result: 17 | ACF Regionals | 2016 | Round: Yale A + Kentucky A + Michigan B + Cambridge | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 60617

Question: In the Aeneid, the Cumaean Sybil informs Aeneas that this deity appointed her to guard the Avernian grove. According to the Theogony, Zeus granted this deity a "share of the earth and the unfruitful sea," since Zeus honored this deity above all. During the Gigantomachy, this deity killed Clytius. For delaying the birth of Heracles, Galinthias was transformed into a weasel and became this deity's sacred animal. For murdering some Thracian thieves, Hecuba was transformed into an animal that served as this deity's servant. This goddess was typically depicted grasping a pair of torches, which she used on one occasion to aid Demeter in her search for Persephone. In art, this goddess was usually accompanied by a black dog. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of necromancy and witchcraft.

ANSWER: Hecate

Result: 18 | ACF Fall | 2015 | Round: Berkeley A + UGA A | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 59930

Question: The songs of the bard Demodocus drive this hero to tears some time after he uses Ino's magic veil to reach the island of Scheria and enjoy the hospitality of the queen Arete. Ajax refuses to speak to this hero on a journey to the underworld during which Tiresias advises him to avoid eating the cattle of Helios. This hero is forced to live with Calypso for seven years in part for incurring the wrath of Poseidon by introducing himself as "Nobody" and driving a wooden stake through the eye of the cyclops Polyphemus. For 10 points, name this father of Telemachus who reunites with his wife Penelope after a ten-year voyage home from Troy.

ANSWER: Odysseus [or Ulysses]

Result: 19 | ACF Fall | 2015 | Round: Oxford B + UGA C | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 60096

Question: After he is refused hospitality, this hero angrily transforms Atlas into an enormous mountain. During his travels in Ethiopia, this hero slays the sea monster Cetus and takes the daughter of Cepheus as his wife. He is not Heracles, but this hero ascertains the location of the Hesperides by stealing the single eye shared by the Graeae. This hero is conceived when a shower of gold rains on his mother Danae. Equipped with Hades's cap of invisibility and Hermes's winged sandals, this husband of Andromeda keeps his vision firmly on the reflection of the Aegis as he kills the only mortal Gorgon. For 10 points, name this slayer of Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 20 | ACF Fall | 2015 | Round: WUStL A + JHU A + TAMU A | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 60080

Question: In the Metamorphoses, the rainbow goddess Iris leads this hero's wife to a star that falls from the sky. This hero's sudden disappearance during a storm is later attributed to his rapture into the heavens and subsequent apotheosis as the god Quirinus. A rival mockingly leaps over a wall built by this man, who earlier witnesses the omen of twelve vultures flying overhead. He organizes a festival of Neptune as a ploy for his men to take the Sabine women as wives. As a baby, this hero and his short-lived brother are raised by a she-wolf after they are taken from their mother Rhea Silvia. For 10 points, name this twin brother of Remus and mythical founder of Rome.

ANSWER: Romulus

Result: 21 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 1 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 56259

Question: According to the Theogony, a character of this name was kidnapped by Aphrodite not long after his birth to Eos and Cephalus. A more famous figure of this name causes a serpent who was "before not frightening to anyone" to become agitated and leads Bootes to flee. That account of this figure also describes the inscription on this figure's tomb near the Po river. In that tale of this figure, which follows a challenge by Epaphus to this figure, his grandmother Tethys thrusts back the gates of a stable, out of which he drives the horses Pyrois, Eous, Aethon, and Phlegon. The actions of this character resulted in the Ethiopians' skin to turn black, the cold Triones to heat up, the earth to split open, and the seas to evaporate. For 10 points, name this son of Clymene and Helios who tried to drive the chariot of the sun.

ANSWER: Phaethon

Result: 22 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 10 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56460

Question: Armor made by this character that was immune to steel and iron weapons was used successfully by her sons until an old man revealed that the armor had a weakness to stones. Those sons of this character were attempting to take revenge for the horse-trampling death of their sister, who was accused of having an affair with Randver. This character attempts to commit suicide by holding stones and jumping into the sea, but the waves carry her to the kingdom of Jonakr, who she marries. In one source, this mother of Hamdir, Sörli, and Svanhild is hacked up by Hildebrand, the mentor of Dietrich of Bern, after she decapitates Hagen. In another source, she takes revenge for her murdered family by killing her sons Erp and Eitil and feeding them to the murderer, her second husband Atli. In the Nibelungenlied, this character is known as Kriemhild. For 10 points, name this sister of Gunnar who marries Sigurd in the Volsunga saga.

ANSWER: Gudrun [or Kriemhild until it is read]

Result: 23 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 11 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 56486

Question: This object is listed between "Grani's fair burden" and "the down of Grafvitnir" in a poem from the Bjarkamal. A dwarf with the same name as this entity is the first of the list of Dvalin's throng in the "Dvergatal" of the Voluspo, the only reference to this object's name in eddic poetry. In the Skirnismal, Skirnir offers eleven golden apples and this item to Gymir's daughter Gerd on behalf of Freyr. During the creation of this object, its creator was bitten on the neck by a fly. Hermod brings this artifact back to Asgard from Hel after it was thrown onto the funeral pyre of Baldr. It was created as part of a wager between Loki and Brokkr and Sindri, who forge this artifact along with Gullinbursti and Mjölnir. Like Andvaranaut, this annular artifact also produces eight similar objects of the same weight every ninth night. For 10 points, name this magic golden ring initially possessed by Odin.

ANSWER: Draupnir

Result: 24 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 12 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56502

Question: This deity is celebrated at a festival in which men place barley seeds on their caps or behind their ears. The Hindustani equivalent of the pentatonic ragam Shudhha Saveri is named for this deity. Guru Gobind Singh wrote a ballad about this deity titled Chandi di Var. While sipping from a wine cup, this goddess slew Mahishasura with a trident, when that demon attacked her as a buffalo. In Gujarat, her worship takes the form of the garba dance during the festival of Navratri. A temple dedicated to her is called the National Temple of Bangladesh. Her namesake puja involves immersing her idol in water, starting the same night as Navratri, which celebrates the nine forms of this goddess of Shakti. Commonly depicted riding a lion or a tiger, this goddess resides on Mount Kashi as a form of Parvati, along with her husband Shiva. For 10 points, name this invincible Hindu goddess who represents the victory of good over evil.

ANSWER: Durga [or Narayani; or Padmanabha-Sahodari; or Parvati or Shakti until "Mahishasura" is read and prompt thereafter; prompt on "Devi"]

Result: 25 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 12 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 56516

Question: This man gave a cap to Amphidamas, who gave it to Molus, who gave it to his own son Meriones. This man was born when Hermes touched his mother's face to make her fall asleep, and then raped her. The Odyssey lists this man's wife as Amphithea, but better-known accounts have him marrying a woman whose father ran a scam in which he sold her to a series of suitors for the bride price, only to have her return by transforming into a different animal. Heracles learned the art of wrestling from this man and served three years of penance for killing this man's son Iphitus. A youth who went hunting with this husband of Mestra was scarred by a boar just above his knee, leaving a mark that was recognized by the youth's nurse Eurycleia. This man, like Hades, had a helmet of invisibility, and he once out-trickstered Sisyphus by stealing his herd. For 10 points, name this best thief in Greek mythology, who imparted his cunning to his grandson Odysseus.

ANSWER: Autolycus

Result: 26 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 13 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56523

Question: In one source, the domain of this god was protected by twenty-one pylons and seven arits, all of which were successfully surpassed by Ani. According to the inscription on a sarcophagus lid, a high steward named Peftuaneith built a temple to an aspect of this god. That form of this god is sometimes also given as a form of a son of Nephthys, and is called Khenti-Amentiu. Another source suggests that the appearance of this god was heralded by the shout of Pamyles. This wearer of the atef crown is thought to be descended from the earlier Andjety, and he rules over a field of reed-covered islands called Aaru. Ptolemy I attempted to please his Greek overlords by creating a cult centered on a combination of this god and the Apis bull. In a myth related by Plutarch, a chest containing this god is retrieved from a tree in Byblos by his wife. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of the afterlife who fathered Horus with his wife Isis.

ANSWER: Osiris

Result: 27 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 14 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 56543

Question: A poet who could summon necromantic kittens learned the entirety of this event's narrative when a ghost of one of its participants told him about it at his mist-shrouded gravestone. During this event, a character shoots a bird and a squirrel off the shoulders of people standing on opposite sides of a river. A character wounded during this event wanders across the countryside naming places before he dies. A character taking part in this event is interrupted by the interference of an eel and a she-wolf. A sword that makes rainbows when it is swung is used to slice the tops off of three hills by a participant in this event. Many warriors are unable to participate in this conflict due to a curse that plagued them with nine days of debilitating labor pains. Episodes in this conflict include the death of Ferdiad and combat with Fergus mac Roich, and it was sparked when a queen found herself less wealthy than her husband Ailill. For 10 points, Cuchulainn tried to prevent what event in which Queen Medb ("mayv") stole a brown bull from Ulster?

ANSWER: Cattle Raid of Cooley [or Táin Bó Cúailnge ("tyne bo coo-ahl-nyeh"); prompt on "cattle raid" or obvious equiva- lents]

Result: 28 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 15 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 56570

Question: Antoninus Liberalis reports that Periphas, and not this man, was the first to have his unusual manner of birth. Polydore Vergil claims that this man raised the child who invented the quadriga. He introduced a new method of worshipping the gods in which cakes, rather than bloody animal sacrifices, were used as offerings. Some sources state he founded the towns of Tetrapolis, Epakria and Eleusis, and that he was a son of Pandion. In another story, this man's daughters Herse, Pandrosus, and Aglaurus opened a box, shrieked, and threw themselves off of a cliff, because they found this man's successor Erichthonius inside. This king judged a contest in which one of the participants planted an olive tree and the other used a trident to create a salty sea. For 10 points, name this autochthonous, half-serpent mythical founder of Athens.

ANSWER: Cecrops

Result: 29 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 16 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56586

Question: This deity, who was worshipped in caves with a sunken floor for offerings, was the god who governed days with the day sign Cuauhtli, or Eagle. A number of skin and eye diseases required propitiating this patron of goldsmiths, who was the subject of a hymn that called him the "Night Drinker." This god was worshipped at the temple of Yopico. Sculptural depictions of this god and his followers contain telltale crisscross lines across the chest and the back of the skull. A festival involving the so-called "gladiator sacrifice" was dedicated to this god, who was also known as Red Tezcatlipoca. This deity was the divine embodiment of life emerging from dead land, and during annual corn planting festivals, priests to this deity would sacrifice victims before donning their skin. For 10 points, name this Aztec fertility god whose name literally means "Our lord the flayed one."

ANSWER: Xipe Totec [or Tlatlauhca; or Youalahuan until "Night Drinker" is read; or Tlatlauhqui Tezcatlipoca or Red Tezcatlipoca until "Red" is read; do NOT accept or prompt on "Tezcatlipoca"]

Result: 30 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 18 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 56638

Question: The sight of one of these figures transforming into a parrot caused Vyasa to ejaculate onto a stick, leading to the birth of his parrot-headed son Shuka. In the Mahabharata,Vishwakarma created another of these figures that stopped the rampage of Sunda and Upasunda. Ghritachi and Tilottama are two of these figures, another of whom was given a jar filled with Mitra and Varuna's semen. Though the Manu Shastra state that the first thirteen of them were created to accompany the first seven Manus, other sources state that they were born from the union of Arishta and Kasyapa. Most accounts state that they were born as a result of the Churning of the Ocean. These inhabitants of Devaloka were married to the musically-skilled gandharvas, and their number includes the very beautiful Urvashi, who seduced King Puravanas. For 10 points, name these celestial dancing nymphs of Hindu mythology.

ANSWER: apsaras [or apsarasas]

Result: 31 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 19 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 56662

Question: This man and his retinue comes to a bridge over black, devilish, water and think they see two lions tethered to a large rock, but that turns out to be an enchantment. In an early episode, this hero foolishly ignores the advice of a maiden and sleeps in a bed; at the stroke of midnight a lance with a blazing pennant falls onto the bed and nearly burns him to death. Later on, he uses his bare hands to remove iron bars from a cage which causes him to bleed; he then makes love with his lady while bleeding, leading Sir Kay to be accused of adultery. This man crosses a bridge shaped like a sword to enter the kingdom of Gorre, which is ruled by King Bagdemagus. He kills the dishonorable Meleagant and received his nickname by riding a vehicle that is reserved for criminals to be pilloried. For 10 points, name this "knight of the cart" who rescues Guinevere in a poem by Chretien de Troyes.

ANSWER: Lancelot [or The Knight of the Cart until it is read]

Result: 32 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 2 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56271

Question: This man receives a gift of magical pigs from an ally, but they are stolen, leading to a war between this man and the thief that ends when this man dies in single combat at a yellow ford. According to the Stanzas of the Graves, he was buried "where the waves beat against the land" at Aber Gwenoli. In another story, this man entered a castle and saw four endless chains attached to a golden bowl; when he touched the bowl, he became stuck to the floor. He was given a name referring to his golden hair by his foster father Teyrnon, who found him after cutting off the arm of a horse-stealing beast. He brought back Manawydan as a second husband for his mother shortly after himself marrying Cigfa. This man lost his role as king of Dyfed after being killed in one-on-one combat by Gwydion. Shortly after his birth, his mother had puppy blood smeared on her face so that her maidens accuse her of infanticide. For 10 points, name this hero who appears in all four branches of the Mabinogion, the son of Pwyll and Rhiannon.

ANSWER: Pryderi [or Gwri Wallt Euryn; or Gwri of the Golden Hair]

Result: 33 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 20 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 56680

Question: The "Good Sister" and the "Lord of the Two Lands" are worshipped in the northern half of a symmetrical temple whose southern half is dedicated to this god. This god "spends seed with his phallus" and "takes wives from their husbands," according to the Pyramid Texts. The final ruler of the 12th Dynasty was named for the "beauty of" this god, whose worship was promul- gated by that ruler's father Amenemhat III. The temple of Medinet Madi was dedicated to this god and his wife Renenutet. The primary temple of this god was home to his jewel-adorned avatar Petsuchos. One account held that this god created the world by laying eggs on the banks of Nun. This son of Neith was the patron god of the region of Faiyum, and he used a net to collect the sons of Horus from the Nile, another place with which he is often associated. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god with the head of a crocodile.

ANSWER: Sobek [or Sebek; or Sochet; or Suchos until "Petsuchos" is read]

Result: 34 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 21 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 56703

Question: In The Metamorphoses, this figure states that she has often read the names on empty tombs while giving an impassioned speech in which she reminds her husband that his father-in-law controls winds that may create deadly red lightning in the sky. This woman's story in The Metamorphoses features a digression in which Iris enters the cave from which Lethe springs to ask Morpheus to transform into an ethereal version of this woman's husband. This Queen of Trachis is unable to convince her husband to abandon his sea journey to the oracle of Delphi, causing her to incessantly worry about his doomed fate. After Zeus strikes down this character's husband for uxoriously calling her "Hera" during bouts of lovemaking, she is turned into a kingfisher. For 10 points, name this wife of Ceyx ["see-ix"] who gives her name to an English word referring to an idyllic past.

ANSWER: Alcyone [or Halkyon; or Halcyon]

Result: 35 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 22 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 56721

Question: In one story, a man comes to this location and is told to visit an old frog who may know the location of "I Know Not Whither" so that he can find "I Know Not What." A young man comes to this location and subdues its forty mare-daughters in a story in which its primary occupant gives him a fire-breathing enchanted horse so that he can rescue his bride Maria Morena. In another story, the day, the sun, and the night are represented by horsemen clothed in all white, red and black who come and go from this location. In that story, a talking doll in this place helps a maiden separate rotten corn from good corn so that she is not killed. The primary occupant of this location once terrorized Vasilisa the Fair, and is normally seen flying around in a giant mortar. The skulls of unfortunate passersby decorate the fences surrounding this location, which is supported by either one or several chicken legs. For 10 points, name this building in a forest, which is occupied by a Slavic hag.

ANSWER: Baba Yaga's house [or obvious equivalents that mention Baba Yaga]

Result: 36 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 23 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56734

Question: A son of this man fought alongside Leonteus during the Trojan War and buried Calchas in Colophon. One story claimed that this man was killed by a dog with the unoriginal name of "Cerberus" while attempting to gain access to Cora, the daughter of the Molossian king Aedoneus. This father of Polypoetes is mocked by Lelex for objecting to a story told by Achelous in the Metamorphoses. After driving a herd of cattle out of Marathon, he befriended their owner, and aided that man in his attempt to abduct a 13-year-old princess. This character's wedding to Hippodamia was the occasion for the brawl between the Centaurs and his people. Heracles was unable to rescue this man from the stone in the underworld where he and a companion became stuck while this man was trying to abduct Persephone. For 10 points, name this Lapith king, a longtime companion of Theseus.

ANSWER: Pirithous [or Peirithous; or Perithous]

Result: 37 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 24 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 56759

Question: This thing titles a book-length study by Charles Segal, who argued against Samuel Basset's suggestion that its treatment was in line with ancient morality. In order to console a man who weeps because he doesn't have this object, a hero gives an impassioned speech about an urn of evils and an urn of blessings that belong to Zeus. A dark cloud sent from heaven protected this thing from the sun. This object's mistreatment is juxtaposed with the care shown to a similar entity, which is ritually wrapped in sheep fat and covered with the blood of twelve sacrificed youths. On the twelfth day after constantly protecting it with his golden aegis, Apollo implores Zeus to send Thetis and Iris to arrange for its rightful return. A twelve day ceasefire is instigated to ensure all the rites are carried out on this thing, and the final line of The Iliad states that it was properly buried. Earlier, it was dragged three times around the tomb of Patroclus out of anger. For 10 points, name these remains of King Priam's son.

ANSWER: Hector's corpse [or Hector's body; or obvious equivalents]

Result: 38 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 25 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 56788

Question: A love goddess descends from heaven and tries to charm this figure, but an oceanic wave tells her that her attempts are in vain because this figure is both deaf and blind. This being was created to accomplish a goal that the dragon Hedamu failed to complete. A god is brought to tears after seeing this figure from the top of Mount Hazzi. Astabi leads seventy gods against this threat, but they are unable to stop this figure since it had grown into the realm of the heavenly gods from the underworld, where it perched on Upelluri. This menace was finally stopped when a copper saw was used to cut off its legs by the god Ea. Kumarbi created this creature by impregnating a cliff face as part of his plan to overthrow Teshub. For 10 points, name this genderless giant made out of green quartz, who titles one of the best preserved narratives of Hurrian mythology.

ANSWER: Ullikummi

Result: 39 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 56302

Question: One of these animals gave birth to a child that had to be fed an entire cow's milk each day, but was killed when it was shortchanged by greedy milkmaids and began hungrily eyeing the local herd. That one, like his twin Sceolan, came to be one of these creatures when Iollan's mistress jealously turned Uirne into one. Mabon ap Modron is the only person capable of tracking down one of these animals, so Culhwch is forced to find him while hunting for a different animal. Drudwyn is one of these animals, a group of which are accompanied by a cackling old hag named Night-Mallt. An encounter with a white, red-eared group of these animals belonging to Arawn proves troublesome for Pwyll. A geis is violated when a hero is offered the meat of this animal by a crone. Setanta received the name "Cuchulainn" after killing, and taking the place of, one of these animals who was responsible for guarding Culann. For 10 points, name these loyal domestic animals.

ANSWER: dogs [or obvious equivalents; do not accept "wolves" or the like]

Result: 40 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 56323

Question: One of these animals gave birth to a child that had to be fed an entire cow's milk each day, but was killed when it was shortchanged by greedy milkmaids and began hungrily eyeing the local herd. That one, like his twin Sceolan, came to be one of these creatures when Iollan's mistress jealously turned Uirne into one. Mabon ap Modron is the only person capable of tracking down one of these animals, so Culhwch is forced to find him while hunting for a different animal. Drudwyn is one of these animals, a group of which are accompanied by a cackling old hag named Night-Mallt. An encounter with a white, red-eared group of these animals belonging to Arawn proves troublesome for Pwyll. A geis is violated when a hero is offered the meat of this animal by a crone. Setanta received the name "Cuchulainn" after killing, and taking the place of, one of these animals who was responsible for guarding Culann. For 10 points, name these loyal domestic animals.

ANSWER: dogs [or obvious equivalents; do not accept "wolves" or the like]

Result: 41 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 4 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 56329

Question: A text describes how this god was brought gifts by a figure repeatedly described as "the wild bull with brindled thighs" named Pabilsag. This god speaks through "The Smasher of Thousands," a flying mace that his son uses to defeat the demon Azag. This god's fertility is praised by an "inspector of canals," Enbilulu, one of the three offspring he conceived in the Underworld. He had a temple at Ekur, and a "Hymn" to this god asserts that his "pure place" is Kiur and that he mapped and built the city of Nippur by himself. A lion-headed bird named Anzu is defeated by this god's son, Ninurta, after that bird steals the Tablets of Destiny from this god. This son of Anu and Ki granted immortality to Utnapishtim after that man was forewarned about a catastrophic event by Enki. For 10 points, identify this Sumerian wind god, whose consort was Ninlil, and who attempted to wipe out humanity with the Great Flood.

ANSWER: Enlil [or Ellil]

Result: 42 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 4 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 56349

Question: According to Snorri, a king of Uppsala named Swegde spent many years trying to enter the realm of this god. A euhemerized account of this figure's rule states that, after this figure died at Swithiod, he went to Godheim. According to the Heimskringla, this man was the second husband of Skadi. He disguised himself as Vegtam in order to learn secret knowledge. Although this god is not Freyr, he established the laws of mankind and possessed a ship that could be folded up. In The Poetic Edda, this god answers the questions of the volva and disguises himself, which leads to him being tortured by Geirrod. In more traditional accounts, this god plunged a sword into the Barnstokk tree and his son Vidar will avenge his death at the jaws of Fenrir at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this one-eyed "allfather" of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin [or Woden; or Wotan]

Result: 43 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 5 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 56360

Question: The Basque goddess Mari turned a shepherd who built a house too close to one of her caves into this animal. One of these animals named Kutkh turns into an old man after regurgitating the Earth in a Chukchi myth. The protector deity Gonpo Jarodonchen is represented by this animal, explaining its presence on the royal crown of Bhutan. One of these animals pushed a thorn into the foot of another animal to make it drop the box containing the sun, moon, and stars. In a similar myth system, one of these animals sang to a clam to make it release the first men. Another goddess appeared in the form of this animal to advise Donn Cuailnge ("Cooley") to flee and also to signify the death of Cuchulainn. Apollo's prophecies were delivered by this animal, which was originally white until he scorched it for bringing him bad news. The Morrigan often took the form of, for or 10 points, which bird, two of which named Hugin and Munin were owned by Odin?

ANSWER: ravens [or crows; or corvids; prompt on "birds"]

Result: 44 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 6 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 56380

Question: An alternate name for this hero derives from an exploit in which he used a boot as a weapon. In one story, he is picked up and put in the pocket of a man who later becomes his companion; this character later creates a series of iron hoops by using an ancient sword to hit a coffin in which that companion had accidentally sealed himself. He angrily knocked down a bunch of church steeples when his ruler didn't invite him to a party. He's not Sundiata, but due to a childhood illness, this hero could not walk, so he lay on top of a stove until he was thirty-three, when he was healed by some passing pilgrims. This hero defeated a flying forest-dwelling monster which killed people with its powerful whistle. That victory over Nightingale the Robber pleased this hero's ruler, Vladimir of Kiev. For 10 points, name this bogatyr, a Russian folk hero from Murom.

ANSWER: Ilya Muromets [or Ilya of Murom; or Ilya the Muromanian; or Chobitko; or Ilya after "Murom" is read]

Result: 45 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 7 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 56401

Question: In the Mahabharata, the son of a god who has this role proves himself superior to the son of another god by knocking out his own teeth to give a beggar some alms. The Baltic god who served this role was married to Meness, who had an affair with Ausrine. The Gayatri mantra prominently mentions a Vedic deity responsible for an aspect of this domain called Savitr. Arvak and Alsvid serve one god of this domain, while another such god rides in a chariot pulled by seven horses. After Tecciztecatl proves to be too cowardly, Nanahuatzin calmly walks into a bonfire and becomes the final god of this domain in Aztec myth. The severed asura head Rahu in Hindu myth and the varg Sköll in Norse myth both seek to devour the representation of a god of this domain. Heracles once received a golden goblet from a god with this role after he aimed at arrow at it when he became too hot. For 10 points, name this domain of gods like Surya and Helios.

ANSWER: the Sun [or sun gods/goddesses/deities; or solar deities; or obvious equivalents]

Result: 46 | ACF Nationals | 2015 | Round: 8 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 56430

Question: This character claims that a boy leaning on a headless spear is "fated to hold a place nearest the light".After meeting King Anius, this man misinterprets a prophecy from Apollo based on his memory of Teucer having sailed from Crete. In another appearance, this man determines that both war and peace are heralded by the appearance of four white horses. Nisus helps Euryalus win a foot race and an arrow shot by Acestes bursts into flames at this man's funeral games, which take place after his death in Drepanum. The appearance of a shooting star and the sudden unearthly fire surrounding another character's head finally convince this character to accompany his son. This man bragged about his two-week lovemaking session with a disguised goddess until Zeus crippled him with a lightning bolt, which is why he is forced to escape Troy on his son's shoulders. For 10 points, name this grandfather of Ascanius, whose affair with Venus resulted in the birth of his son Aeneas.

ANSWER: Anchises

Result: 47 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Bellarmine HS + Columbia A + Louisiana-Lafayette | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 46321

Question: One of these objects is owned by a giant whose wife births a fully armed son every six weeks. That owner of one of these objects, who escapes a plot to roast him alive in an iron house, is named Llasar Llaes Gyfnewid. Along with a staff and a platter, Bran gives one to Matholwch as reparations, which Efnisien sacrifices himself to destroy and stop it from resurrecting the Irish dead. A non-Odin father of Tyr owns one of these objects, which was retrieved in a quest including the fishing trip in which Thor hooks Jormungand. Hymir owns a massive one of these that the gods bring to Aegir's feast for brewing beer. In one named Odrerir, Kvasir's blood is mixed with honey to make the mead of poetry. For 10 points, name these metal objects in which Ceridwen and other legendary witches brew potions.

ANSWER: cauldrons [or kettles; or pots; accept any descriptive answer indicating a large open container for mixing or storing liquid]

Result: 48 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Brown A + University of Washington + Notre Dame A | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 46338

Question: This geographic feature was closed to Christians by traders called Karimi after Reynaud of Chatillon irked them. Purported cave dwellers on this body of water's western side were the first people called "Troglodytes." A port called "Mussel Harbor" abutted this body near Berenice according to an anonymous 1st-century text about its peoples. The city of Adulis traded with the Himyarite kingdom across this body of water, allowing Axum access to frankincense and myrrh traders who plied this sea. Ships sailed down from this sea toward the land of Punt during Queen Hatshepsut's reign. For 10 points, name this sea finally joined to the Mediterranean by the Suez Canal.

ANSWER: Red Sea [or Erythrean Sea; or Sea of Reeds; or Yam Suf; accept Indian Ocean during the first sentence ONLY and do not accept it thereafter]

Result: 49 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Brown A + University of Washington + Notre Dame A | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 46342

Question: Most scholars identify this deity with a figure named Saga who dwells in Sokkvabekk. Along with a servant, this deity helped to heal the horse of Phol. Hlin and Syn serve this figure, who told the women of Winnili to cover their faces with hair, thus helping to found the Lombards. Two other servants of this deity, who ride the horse Hofvarpnir and carry shoes respectively, are Gna and Fulla. At the hall Fensalir, this goddess spins the clouds on a loom. Loki accused this goddess of having affairs with Vili and Ve. After this goddess sent Hermod on a mission to Hel, the giantess Thokk refused to weep for her dead son because this goddess failed to get an oath from mistletoe to remain harmless. For 10 points, name this Norse goddess, the mother of Baldur and wife of Odin.

ANSWER: : Frigga [or Fricka; accept Frija with the standard English "j" sound; do not accept "Freya"]

Result: 50 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Chattahoochee HS + Columbia B + Toronto B | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 46371

Question: In Shinto myth, a god's arm turns into an icicle during an instance of this activity when it is used to decide the ruler of Japan by Takemikazuchi and Takeminakata. In the Mahabharata, Krishna uses a blade of grass to demonstrate to Bhima how he can defeat Jarasandha in this activity. A Libyan giant uses the skulls of his victims in this activity to build a temple to his father Poseidon. In the Prose Edda, Elli is an old hag who is able to defeat Thor in this because she is a personification of old age. Atalanta defeats Peleus in this, and Heracles kills a practitioner of it in midair because he draws his strength from the earth. The giant Antaeus kills travelers after challenging them to this athletic competition. For 10 points, name this activity invented by the Shinto gods in its "sumo" form.

ANSWER: wrestling [accept sumo wrestling; prompt on "combat," "fighting," etc.]

Result: 51 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Chicago A + Maggie Walker HS + Yale A | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 46461

Question: A great-grandson of this man fought with Goffarius of Aquitane and was accompanied to Albion by Corineus, namesake of Cornwall. This man wins a fight after a shrieking bird flies around his enemy, terrifying that enemy. This man is given ships by Tarchon, and Cymodocea leads some sea nymphs which had formerly been his ships. According to Geoffrey of Monmouth, a great-grandson of this man named Brutus was the first king of the Britons. This man stabs an enemy upon seeing a belt taken from this man's dead companion, Pallas. Hector appears to this figure in a dream, telling him to flee, but his wife Creusa dies in the attempt. This killer of Turnus was the father of Ascanius. For 10 points, name this Trojan hero who fled to Italy and became ancestor to the Romans.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 52 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Dartmouth A | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 46491

Question: According to Eustathius, this god killed a king of Cyprus who sent earth-made ships and fake men instead of the fifty manned ships which he promised Agamemnon. This killer of Cinyras also killed a being who picked up the aulos that Athena cast away upon being horrified at her reflection. This god transformed the nymph Castalia into a spring, and he fathered the beekeeper Aristaeus. At the beginning of the Iliad, this god spreads a plague among the Greeks. This god gave a pair of asses' ears to Midas, and he flayed the satyr Marsyas after beating him in a music contest. With his sister, this archer god killed the children of Niobe. For 10 points, name this Greek god who killed the python and established the Oracle at Delphi, the brother of Artemis.

ANSWER: Apollo [or Apollon; or Phoebus]

Result: 53 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Georgia Tech | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 46509

Question: Xuan Wu's stomach turned into one of these animals. Nuwa cut the legs off of one of these named Ao and used those legs to prop up the sky. Apollo transformed into first this animal, and then a snake, in order to rape Dryope. A nymph who did not attend Zeus and Hera's wedding, Chelone, was turned into this animal. An object derived from one was used by Heracles to kill Linus. One of these animals ensured that Mount Mandara did not fall into the milk ocean, and another killed travelers who stooped to wash the feet of Sciron and got pushed off of a cliff. Vishnu's second avatar, Kurma, is one of these animals. Hermes killed an ox and one of these on the day he was born, so as to fashion a lyre. For 10 points, name this animal, which in many Native American myths holds the earth on its back.

ANSWER: turtles [or tortoises]

Result: 54 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Illinois A + Ottawa A | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 46630

Question: This figure eats all but one of Fish's eggs, but escapes blame by continually wiping a mark off of the remaining egg as it is counted. This character claims that he had to bury his father in his head, which proves that he is older than the rabbit or the porcupine, and he is able to turn an ear of corn into a following of one hundred soldiers. He pretended to measure the length of a branch against the length of a snake, allowing him to capture that python. While climbing a tree, he dropped a pot full of wisdom, allowing wisdom to spread across the world. He traded the python Onini, the hornets Mmoboro, and the leopard Osebo in exchange for all of the world's stories from his sky god father Nyame. For 10 points, name this wily character from West African folklore who is depicted as a spider

ANSWER: Anansi [or Kwaku Ananse]

Result: 55 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Louisiana Tech + RIT + Johns Hopkins A | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 46638

Question: In Cherokee myth, evil little people are named for these objects, in contrast with the laurel people and dogwood people. The Norse gods placed one deep in the earth under Lyngvi and attached it to another one named Thviti. On the advice of Phineus, a dove was used to overcome two of these, and in book 14 of the Iliad, Ajax almost kills Hector with one. They 're not rivers, but one named Gjoll was used in the binding of Fenrir. Deucalion and Pyrrha threw these objects over their shoulders to create humans. After telling his wife Merope not to bury him, and chaining Hades or Thanatos, a king of Corinth got a punishment involving one. A pair of them, the Symplegades, threatened to wreck the Argo. For 10 points, name these objects, one of which Sisyphus must eternally roll up a hill.

ANSWER: rocks [or boulders; or stones; accept other reasonable equivalents]

Result: 56 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Maryland A + Minnesota | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 46893

Question: Mielikki fashioned one of these animals from wool. One of these animals fathered two giants who were later turned into an eagle owl and a vulture; those twins, Agrius and Oreius, were born after Polyphonte had sex with one. Young girls in saffron robes imitated these animals in a ritual practiced at Brauron. A hero who kills these animals dies fighting the Dark Knight and loves Laimdota in the Latvian epic Lacplesis. Twenty cloves of garlic and 100 days in a cave turn one into a human woman in Korean mythology. Arcas was born to a huntress of Artemis who became one of these animals after Zeus seduced her. Japan's Ainu people revere these animals as sacred kamui. For 10 points, name this animal which Callisto was turned into before she became the constellation Ursa Major.

ANSWER: bears

Result: 57 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Maryland A + Minnesota | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 46899

Question: Because it likes to set itself on fire, one of these objects named Luin is kept in a container of water; that object is stolen after the sons of Tuireann kill King Pisear with an apple to the head. Shortly after killing the invisible knight Garlon, a knight of King Arthur finds one of these objects that perpetually drips blood. Pieces from one of these objects were used to heal Telephus after Achilles injured him with it; that example of these objects was made by Chiron from an ash tree. Balin used one of these to deliver the Dolorous Stroke, which maimed the Fisher King and brought a curse upon the Waste Land. Izanagi dripped salt off of one of these objects to create the islands of Japan. A mythical Norse one that never misses is Gungnir. For 10 points, name these long weapons used by Lancelot for jousting.

ANSWER: spears [or lances; or javelins; or polearms; accept other similar weapons; accept Lúin before "Garlon"]

Result: 58 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: MIT A + Texas A&M A | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 46856

Question: According to the 10th-century reference book Suda, this person killed himself after being taken to Crete by Minos. Nonnus records that this person judged a game of cottabus between Hymen and Eros; in the Argonautica, he plays dice with Eros. Artistic depictions of this figure often show him holding a rooster or pushing a hoop. After the disappearance of this brother of Assaracus and Ilus, a golden vine and two horses that could run on water were given to his father, Tros. Unlike Endymion and Tithonus, this person was granted eternal youth without complications. Later turned into the constellation Aquarius, this youth replaced Hebe after he was taken from Mount Ida by a god taking the form of an eagle. For 10 points, name this youth loved by Zeus who became cupbearer to the Greek gods.

ANSWER: Ganymede [or Ganymedes; or Catamitus]

Result: 59 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Penn A + Louisville + Waterloo B | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 46914

Question: In one story, these figures send some ants to cut down flowers and bring them back. Scholars debate why a member of this group is male but has a name beginning with a feminine prefix. Two of their enemies attack them with thistles and climb a tree which these figures cause to steadily grow. These figures are brought a message by a louse, inside of a toad, inside of a snake, inside of a hawk. They are born after a skull hanging from a fruit tree spits in their mother's hand. To recover a lost arm, these people pose as dentists and replace their enemy's teeth with corn. They ascend to become the sun and moon after they defeat Seven Macaw and travel through the House of Bats in order to beat the Lords of Xibalba. For 10 points, identify these brothers, the protagonists of the Mayan Popol Vuh.

ANSWER: Mayan Hero Twins [accept Xbalanque and Hunahpu in either order]

Result: 60 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Penn B + HS contributors + Editors 2 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 46981

Question: According to Nonnus, twelve sons of this god fought with Dionysus in India. In various sources, a version of this god was made into a constellation after helping Zeus fight Typhon. Herodotus groups him with Heracles and Dionysus as young Greek gods adapted from old Egyptian gods. This god's children include Iynx and Acis, and in some myths, he is born to Penelope after she sleeps with one or all of the suitors. In several stories this son of Hermes pursues the nymph Echo. In the Metamorphoses, Mercury lulls Argus to sleep with a story of this god chasing a nymph to the river Ladon, where she is turned into reeds. After pursuing Syrinx, he fashioned a pair of pipes. For 10 points, name this Greek counterpart of the Roman Faunus, a goat-legged god of the wild.

ANSWER: Pan [accept Faunus before mention; accept Aegipan]

Result: 61 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: Stanford + LASA A + MIT B | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 47159

Question: According to Lycophron, this god married a nymph in Pallene, but fled via underground river to leave behind his murderous sons. In the Georgics, this god tells the story of Orpheus to Aristaeus. Euripides and Herodotus identify this god with a king who sheltered Helen during the Trojan War. This god shares his most notable superhuman ability with both Erysichthon's daughter Mestra and Nestor's son Periclymenus. Per Book IV of the Odyssey, this god reveals the fates of Ajax the Lesser and Agamemnon, and his daughter Eidothea hides a man in a sealskin so that he may ambush this god and learn how to return home to Sparta from Pharos. For 10 points, name this husband of Psamathe, a prophetic son of Poseidon and sea god whom Menelaus captures despite his ability to take any shape.

ANSWER: Proteus

Result: 62 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: UCSD + Michigan | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 47179

Question: Julius Pollux recorded that this hero's dog ate some snails, thus discovering a purple dye. This hero killed Syleus, who forced passersby to hoe his vineyard. This man killed Theiodamas in a dispute over a bull, and adopted a son as a companion who was later abducted by nymphs while fetching water. After Eurytus reneged on a promise to give a daughter to the winner of an archery contest, this man killed him and abducted Iole. This companion of Hylas killed Iphitus, for which he was punished by having to wear women's clothing and serve Omphale. This hero was killed by a shirt soaked in the blood of the centaur Nessus, which was given to him by his jealous wife Deianira. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who retrieved the cattle of Geryon while performing his twelve labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 63 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: UGA + Ohio State + Editors 1 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 47215

Question: This god breaks the wings of some eagles at the behest of Danel, who prays to this god for seven days to allow the birth of Aqhat. This god originally didn't want windows in his palace, which was built by Kothar-wa-Hasis. The messengers Gapn and Ugar serve this god, whose sister sacrifices six sets of seventy animals to him after his death. This god fathers a child on a heifer, and a drought is caused by his death, which occurs at the hands of the death god Mot and is avenged by his sister Anat. This god, whose namesake myth cycle is inscribed on six clay tablets in the Ugaritic language, uses two clubs to kill the sea god Yamm. For 10 points, name this Caananite storm and fertility god whose name means "master" in Semitic languages, and whose priests are humiliated by Elijah in the Bible.

ANSWER: Baal [or Hadad]

Result: 64 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: VCU A + Dorman HS | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 47231

Question: One god of this domain, sometimes called Dilimbabbar or Asimbabbar, was conceived after Nuska rowed his father across a river. A man who continuously cuts a self-healing laurel tree accompanies a goddess of this domain. In Mesopotamia, the first child of Enlil and Ninlil was a bull-horned god of this domain, the chief god of Ur, and Ningal's husband; that god is called Nanna or Sin. In Chinese myth, Houyi's wife became the goddess of this domain after drinking an elixir of immortality; that is Chang'e, who lives with a rabbit. The Shinto god of this domain was born when his father washed his right eye. The Greek goddess of it loves the eternally sleeping shepherd Endymion. For 10 points, name this domain of Tsukuyomi, as well as Selene, whom the Romans adapted into Luna.

ANSWER: moon gods/goddesses

Result: 65 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: WUSTL + Harvard | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 47248

Question: This myth system includes an "Isle of Flames" located in the "Sea of the Two Knives." The underworld of this myth system contains a serpent with four bearded human heads on its back, known as the "devourer of spirits." In some tales, its first god created a child from his spit and another from his vomit, after creating himself on a primeval hill that rose from the cosmic ocean. In this system, the gods ruled on earth as kings during the "First Time," and five deities were born on five intercalary days that were won in a gamble with the moon. Each night, a god in this system takes the form Afu to travel through twelve provinces of the underworld, Duat, after a daily ride through the sky on a barque and a battle with the serpent Apep. For 10 points, name this myth system which includes the gods Atum, Thoth, and Ra.

ANSWER: Egyptian mythology [or Heliopolis; or Hermopolis; or Ennead; or Ogdoad]

Result: 66 | ACF Regionals | 2015 | Round: xEMERGENCY EXTRASx | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 47264

Question: In Aztec myth, a failed attempt to perform this task created the frost god Itzlacoliuhqui out of Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli, who was the god of the planet Venus. Tonatiuh reflected that failed attempt at this act. A man whose multiple successes at this task angered Dijun also slew the one-eyed bull demon Fei Lian and was beaten to death with a peach club; that myth envisions this act's victims as birds which escaped from a mulberry tree. Heracles' audacity in threatening this action earned him a huge gold cup from the intended victim after he traveled far to the east. For 10 points, name this action performed nine times by the Chinese hero Houyi to save the world from drought, which targets an astronomical body.

ANSWER: destroying the suns [or killing the suns; or shooting down the suns]

Result: 67 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 1 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 53520

Question: The goddess of love in this culture lures a man to her mother's party by smearing honey on his lips. In one of this people's myths, a woman gets tricked by her romantic rival into cutting off her ears to add to a soup, leading to a quarrel in which she gets turned into a river. The mythical founder of this people died in a riot that broke out near the pyre of an iconoclast who smashed up several statues with an axe, named Braima. They believed that a despotic king hanged himself after a rebellion, became deified, and then gained the ability to unleash storms on his enemies with his (*) double-headed axe. The son of their creator god climbed down a great chain from heaven and used a five-toed chicken to scatter dirt, creating Earth, and then planted a very large palm tree. Eshu is a psychopomp of this people, who venerate the lightning god Shango and the supreme deity Olodumare. For 10 points, name this African ethnic group whose religion blended with Catholicism, resulting in New World religions like Candomble and Santeria.

ANSWER: Yoruba people

Result: 68 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 11 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 55201

Question: This man's father, who led the settlers who founded the city of Amphipolis, was named Hagnon. This man garrisoned a fort at Chrysopolis and collected a customs duty of one-tenth on every ship that passed through the Bosporus. He strongly opposed the construction of a fortification at Eetioneia at the entrance to the harbor of Piraeus, because he figured it was a ploy to hand the city over to the Spartans. This man and Thrasybulus snuck up behind a fleet commanded by Mindarus at the Battle of Cyzicus, and along with Aristocrates, he led the moderate faction in the Four Hundred. This second most-famous person to die from drinking hemlock turned against six (*) generals accused of negligence for failing to rescue sailors of sunken triremes in the aftermath of the Battle of Arginusae. This man was betrayed by his ally Critias, with whom he headed up a pro-Spartan oligarchy. For 10 points, name this Athenian statesman who negotiated the surrender to Sparta in the Peloponnesian War, and became one of the Thirty Tyrants.

ANSWER: Theramenes

Result: 69 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 11 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 55218

Question: The god responsible for this event summons a rude messenger and then sneezes to get another god to drop him. After this event, a god makes a show of taking a key and unlocking many closets' worth of ambrosia, nectar, gold, silver, and fine clothing, although he knows where the responsible party is hiding. When asked about this event, a god replies that he cares only about sleep, his mother's milk, and warm clothing. An old man tilling a vineyard is promised that the grapes will produce a prodigious amount of wine, if he keeps his (*) mouth shut about this event. Hearing about this event, which is described in detail in the longest Homeric Hymn, Zeus erupts with laughter and refuses to dole out punishment. The perpetrator of this event fashions a pair of sandals immediately after reversing a series of hoof-marks to divert suspicion away. After apologizing for this event, its perpetrator hands its victim the first-ever lyre. For 10 points, name this event in Greek mythology, in which a newborn messenger god takes some sources of beef from the twin brother of Artemis.

ANSWER: Hermes stealing Apollo's cattle [or Hermes taking the oxen of Apollo; or equivalents]

Result: 70 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 13 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 55281

Question: An analogue of this god is represented wearing a long robe and shorts, because he was too busy to put on pants on his way down to Earth. This god grants a boon to the priest Li Shao Jun, ensuring that he would never grow old and would never have to eat again, and he supposedly taught Huang Di, the Yellow Emperor, alchemy. In one story, this god foolishly sells cakes with money baked into them. This blind god ambles his way to the house of his wife, whom he had cheated upon, and is treated so hospitably that he is moved to commit suicide, leaving behind only his (*) leg. Not long before Chinese New Year, this god prepares a yearly report for the Jade Emperor, so to ensure his good graces, worshipers smear effigies of this god with honey and burn them to hasten his journey to heaven. Fire pokers are often referred to as the "leg" of this god, whose namesake festival, also known as the "Little New Year," is celebrated with yard and house work. For 10 points, name this popular Chinese god, the protector of the hearth

ANSWER: Kitchen God [or Stove God; or Zao Jun; or Zao Shen; or Zhang Lang; or Ong Tao; or Mandarin God]

Result: 71 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 14 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 55323

Question: A mute one of these creatures with red eyes has a vision in which it sees another of them eating a unicorn. In a dream, one of these creatures attacks and kills Iggo, the leader of the Bloody Mummers. Another of these creatures kills several people at the Battle of Whispering Wood and the Battle of Oxcross. These creatures are first encountered shortly after the death of Gared. A captive one of these creatures is freed by Raynald Westerling shortly before being killed and having its head sewn onto a human corpse. One of these creatures named (*) Nymeria, who is believed to be on the loose in the Riverlands, bites a boy's arm, for which another of them named Lady is executed. A gray one of these animals appears on the sigil of a house whose motto is "Winter is Coming." For 10 points, name these large canines from A Song of Ice and Fire, several of which are owned by the Stark family as pets.

ANSWER: direwolves [prompt on wolves]

Result: 72 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 15 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 55339

Question: In a chapter dedicated to this non-Wallace Stevens poem, Helen Vendler mapped the similarities in word choice between it and Milton's "On the Morning of Christ's Nativity." This poem bombards the reader with sensory detail with its description of a field of "hush'd, cool-rooted flowers, fragrant-eyed, blue, silver-white, and budded Tyrian." The speaker of this poem recalls a time "when holy were the haunted forest boughs, holy the air, the water, and the fire," and offers to be "Thy voice, thy lute, thy pipe, thy incense sweet / From swinged censer teeming." The speaker of this poem predicts that "branched (*) thoughts, new grown with pleasant pain, instead of pines shall murmur in the wind" at the place where he will "build a fane / In some untrodden regions of my mind." The speaker of this poem resolves to keep a casement open at night, "To let the warm love in," and proclaims Phoebe and Vesper to be lower than the title mythological woman on "Olympus' faded hierarchy." For 10 points, name this poem by John Keats, addressed to the lover of Cupid.

ANSWER: Ode to Psyche

Result: 73 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 2 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 53550

Question: A hero named after these beings lives for three hundred years before voluntarily extinguishing a candle and dying. A visit by these beings inspires a man to dream that he releases hawks from his hands and eats their hearts with honey, an omen of his coming cannibalization of his two sons. Andvari blames one of these beings for trapping him beneath a waterfall, and Brynhild blames them for making her lust after Sigurd. With his dying breath, Fafnir asks of the parentage of these beings, and Sigurd replies that some are born to (*) gods, some to elves, and some to dwarves. In the Poetic Edda, Helgi Hundingsbane is visited by these beings soon after his birth. The Voluspa states that the main ones are Verdandi, Skuld, and Urd, and that they pour sand and water from a well to ensure that Yggdrasil does not rot. For 10 points, name these Norse goddesses that determine the destiny of mankind.

ANSWER: Norns

Result: 74 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 53565

Question: This deity received no punishment setting a package down near a pool where she bathed. This deity took revenge on a series of unhelpful sea creatures by inflicting a series of injuries that explain why the flounder is flat, why the turtle has a lump on its back, and why the whale has a split tail. This goddess once tried to climb a tree, but one of the branches broke off and split into a bunch of breadfruit groves where it landed. This goddess's lover, an eel, instructed her to decapitate him and told her how best to use the coconut tree that grew from the eel's headless neck. In one story, this goddess escapes her abusive husband and first goes to the Sun, but finds it too hot, so she rides a rainbow to the (*) Moon, where she can be seen holding a gigantic gourd beating out tapas cloth. The wing of this goddess's pet bird baits the hook with which her husband fishes up the Hawaiian Islands. For 10 points, name this omnipresent Polynesian goddess of the moon and childbirth, who is sometimes the sister or wife of Maui.

ANSWER: Hina [or Sina; accept answers that start with Hina or Sina and then continue with other syllables, I'm too lazy to hunt down all 1000 alternate answers]

Result: 75 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 53572

Question: Much of an eighth-century text called the Waves of Beauty focuses on enumerating the positive aspects of this being. The philosopher Adi Shankara was told by this being that he had the power to remove a corpse from a road. A form of this being named kundalini awakens inside a person and helps them achieve the state of yoga. A different form of this being is worshiped on each of the nine nights of Navratri. The third-largest denomination of Hinduism, following Vaishnava and Shaivism, focuses on worshiping this being. The Maya Devi temple in Haridwar, where the heart and the naval of Sati fell to the Earth, and Kamakhya in the Himalayas, where the same thing happened to Sati's vulva, are considered one of the 51 "peetha" dedicated to this being's worship. It is said that without this being, (*) Shiva is unable to create anything. Parvati is considered a gentle aspect of this being, whose chief manifestation is Durga. For 10 points, name this feminine cosmic power and energy in Hinduism, of whom all Hindu goddesses are merely forms.

ANSWER: Shakti [or Devi; or Adi Parashakti; prompt on any of the following until "all Hindu goddesses" is read: Durga, Kali, Parvati, Sati, Radha, Sita, Lakshmi]

Result: 76 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 4 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 53941

Question: Three naked children ultimately scare away one of these beings after their father creates the illusion of invincibility by fetching a whole herd of oxen, an entire well's worth of water, and twenty trees worth of firewood. One of these beings explodes after drinking too much water to slake his thirst from consuming a sulphur-stuffed lamb. One of these beings, who has a torso covered with fiery snakes, has an affair with the wife of Vladimir I of Kiev, and gets chopped into pieces in a fight because the rain renders him useless. The blood of one of these creatures named Zmey Gorynych (*) traps the hero Dobryna Nikitich for three days. A non-Slavic example of these beings is dispatched by a man who digs numerous trenches for that creature's blood to flow into, then stabs the being in the shoulder, cooks and eats its heart, and learns the language of the birds. Regin orders the slaying of that being of this type, who guards an enormous treasure hoard. For 10 points, name this kind of creature that appears on the coat of arms of Moscow, about to be speared by St. George.

ANSWER: dragons [or serpents before "snakes" is read; or zmey before it is read; or zmaj before "zmey" is read; or smok; or lamya]

Result: 77 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 6 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 55033

Question: A bird that this hero imprisoned in a cage was released by his great-grandson, who became a very wise man as a result. This was the most famous brother of a god who could knock down entire hills with a well-aimed sling-shot; this man tried to send that brother away with promises of a golden cup and a miniature pack animal. This hero's brothers either turned into stone, or sprouted wings and gained the ability to terraform the landscape, upon escaping from a cave. In one story, this hero, who isn't Tutay Quiri, gained ascendancy by impressing his subjects with dazzling sunlight-reflecting clothing. According to the chronicler Garcilaso de la Vega, this hero, Tocay, Pinahua, and Colla held dominion over the (*) "four quarters," or the Tawantinsuyu. This male hero planted a golden staff in the ground to create civilization, alongside his sister and wife Mama Ocllo, following a great flood that Viracocha sent to ravage the area around Lake Titicaca. For 10 points, name this legendary first emperor of the Inca.

ANSWER: Manco Capac [or Ayar Manco]

Result: 78 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 7 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 55049

Question: The earliest surviving marble building in Rome is a temple to this deity in the Forum Boarium, consisting of a circle of twenty Corinthian columns surrounding a cella. During the first week in the lives of Roman boys, before they were even named, food was offered to this deity on their behalf. On the morning of their weddings, brides had their mothers fasten belts, known as the knots of this deity, around their waists. The emperor Caracalla believed himself to be the reincarnation of this god, whose son Aventinus is the namesake of the Aventine Hill. Evander venerates this god for tearing the top off a mountain to reach an adversary who had (*) sealed off a cave with a boulder, and then strangling that fire-breathing giant so hard that his eyes popped out. The Villa of the Papyri was located in a city named for this god. This hero killed Cacus for stealing some of the cattle that he himself had taken from Geryon. For 10 points, name this Roman version of the hero who carried a club and wore a lionskin while undertaking his twelve labors.

ANSWER: Hercules [or Heracles; accept aspects of Hercules, such as Hercules Victor]

Result: 79 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 8 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 55070

Question: . An orgy of violence erupted in this city after Oeonus stoned the guard dog of several brothers here. A statue of Aidos, or Modesty, was erected by a ruler of this city when his daughter covered her face with a veil to indicate that she was leaving with her husband. The town of Amyclae near this city was the cult center of Hyacinthus of lustful-discus-murder fame. Because their mother did not know who was born first, the Oracle of Delphi resolved that Procles and Eurysthenes should (*) both be made kings of this city. In this city, Icarius lost a footrace to Odysseus, who married Penelope as a result. Near this city, a horse was sacrificed and atop the pieces of its carcass, a bevy of suitors swore an oath to protect whoever of them was successful. This city passed from the hands of Tyndareus to the suitor who drew the correct straw and had his house raided by Paris. For 10 points, name this city ruled by Menelaus and Helen just before the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Sparta [or Lacedaemon]

Result: 80 | George Oppen | 2015 | Round: 9 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 55080

Question: The kings of Corinth traced their lineage back to Leipephiline, a daughter of this man. A shrine to this man where male couples made vows was located in Thebes, which held a yearly gymnastic competition in his honor. Diodorus Siculus claims that this man was sent to colonize Sardinia with nine of his cousins, the Thespiades. In the Metamorphoses, Themis forces Hebe to rapidly age the sons of Callirrhoe to compensate for granting this man's wish to be young again. In a poem by Hesiod, this man drives the chariot on an expedition to slay Cycnus. Because her first husband could not stand to see her, the much-older woman (*) Megara was remarried to this sixteen-year old. Either Hyllus or this man, his cousin, killed Eurystheus. In the best-known story about this son of Iphicles, he cauterizes each head of the Hydra as his companion cuts them off. For 10 points, name this nephew and assistant of Heracles.

ANSWER: Iolaus

Result: 81 | JAMES | 2015 | Round: 14 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 58721

Question: One name for this goddess stems from her birthplace near the lake Tritonis. This goddess gave a box to the three daughters of Cecrops which contained the offspring of Hephaestus's failed attempts to rape this figure. In contrast to Poseidon's gift of a salt spring, this goddess gifted an (*) olive tree to a city desiring a name. This daughter of Metis sprung fully formed from another god's head, and had the epithets "Pallas" and "gray-eyed." She lost a weaving contest to Arachne, whom she turned into a spider. For 10 points, name this daughter of Zeus, a Greek goddess of wisdom who is equivalent to Minerva in Roman mythology.

ANSWER: Athena (accept any given name before mention)

Result: 82 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 1 | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 61220

Question: According to the Bibliotheca, Menelaus was attending the funeral of this man's son when Paris abducted Helen. This man owned a newborn calf that oscillated colors every four hours. One of this man's spurned lovers was transformed into a bird as punishment for lopping off her father's purple (*) lock of hair. This man died of a scalding bath while in the court of King Cocalus, and joined Aeacus and Rhadamanthus as judge of the underworld. For 10 points, name this husband of Pasiphae who commissioned Daedalus to construct a labyrinth.

ANSWER: Minos

Result: 83 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 10 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 61488

Question: This figure and his older brother were conceived when Devaki's womb was impregnated with two strands of hair, one black, and one white. tamed a ten-headed cobra who was polluting the Yamuna river by dancing on its heads. His parents were imprisoned because of a prophecy that their eighth child would kill this figure's uncle (*) Kamsa. He is depicted alongside the gopi Radha and delivers a speech about the importance of duty to Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. For 10 points, name this avatar of Vishnu, commonly depicted as a young, flute-playing boy.

ANSWER: Krishna [accept "Balarama" if they buzz on the first clue]

Result: 84 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 11 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 61514

Question: After being denied immediate entry into a castle, this figure threatens to place a curse bringing miscarriages to all of the pregnant women within. This figure gives a golden ring to a shepherd who owns a fire-breathing hound. This figure's cousin aids him in retrieving a comb and a pair of scissors from between the ears of a giant (*) boar as part of a series of tasks to win the hand of Ysbaddaden's daughter. For 10 points, name this cousin of King Arthur who, after rejecting his stepsister, was cursed to marry none but the beautiful Olwen.

ANSWER: Kilhwch [or Culhwch]

Result: 85 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 12 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 61536

Question: This figure rescued a son of Aura named Iakhos from being eaten by his mother. During the Trojan War, Hera struck this figure on the ear with an arrow-filled quiver. The father of Arcas disguised himself as this figure to seduce Callisto. After King (*) Oeneus neglected to honor this deity during a harvest festival, this deity sent forth a fierce boar to terrorize Calydon. A pack of dogs attacked their master Actaeon when he was transformed into a deer as punishment for spotting this goddess bathing. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of the hunt.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 86 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 2 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 61233

Question: The moon goddess of these people witnessed so much adultery at night that she begged to instead be the goddess of the sun. The mythos of these people includes an enormous trout that swallows and spits out the oceans to generate tides. These people appeased the gods by eating the flesh of a certain animal to liberate its spirit in the (*) iomante ceremony. These people revered the sea deity Repun and other spirits called kamuy, and would make yearly bear sacrifices to Kim-un. 10 points, name these indigenous hairy people of Hokkaido.

ANSWER: Ainu people

Result: 87 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 61255

Question: Étáin is turned into this substance after being struck by Fúamnach's scarlet wand. A lover of Anapos is turned into this substance after trying to stop the abduction of Persephone. The daughter of Epimetheus was one of the few not killed by this substance after Nyctimus was sacrificed by his father (*) Lycaon. The daughters of Danaus are doomed to carry this substance for eternity, and those whose deaths involve this substance are sent to Tlaloc's realm. For 10 points, name this substance that makes up the realms of Njord, Amphitrite, and Poseidon.

ANSWER: water

Result: 88 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 4 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 61290

Question: After using a needle to escape this type of place, a tiny boy acquires a wish-granting mallet. A magician sails into one of these places and refuses to leave until he receives the magical words needed to construct a beautiful boat. Issun-bōshi escapes one of these places that belongs to an (*) oni. While his siblings were trapped in this sort of location, one god was hidden in a cave guarded by the Kouretes, and was suckled by Amalthea. For 10 points, name this type of location inhabited by the children of Rhea before they were regurgitated by their father, Cronus

ANSWER: a stomach [accept specific answers, such as "Antero Vipunen's stomach" or "the oni's stomach" or "Cronus's stomach; accept "a giant" on second-sentence buzzes]

Result: 89 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 5 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 61378

Question: This god spent four days in a stone box before ordering that the box be sealed. This god burned down some houses after all of the flowers in his garden died when his brother descended from the sky by a spider's thread. Bees produced sounds as they flew through a (*) conch shell given to this god in the underworld. While there, this god retrieved bones that he later used to recreate mankind. This god's malevolent brother baited Cipactli with his foot. For 10 points, identify this brother of Tezcatlipoca, the "feathered serpent" of the Aztecs.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 90 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 6 | Question: 23 | Mythology | NoneID: 61406

Question: One figure spectates this event after being summoned by Iris in the guise of Laodice. Prior to this event, Agamemnon sends Talthybius to retrieve a lamb to sacrifice to Zeus. One deity intervenes during this event by breaking the strap on one of the participants' helmets. One of its (*) participants, a "beloved of Ares," takes part in this event in the hopes of winning back the woman whose face "launched a thousand ships." For 10 points, identify this duel in Book III of the Iliad between the past and present lovers of Helen.

ANSWER: the duel between Menelaus and Paris [both names are required; accept equivalents for "duel"; generously prompt on "fighting in the Trojan War"]

Result: 91 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 7 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 61426

Question: This figure is deemed insane for reminding Gefjun about an incident involving a youth who had given her a necklace. Sinmara guards a chest with nine locks that contains this figure's wand, Laevateinn. He is driven into the forest for slaying a companion of Eldir named Fimafeng during (*) Aegir's feast. Brokk and Eitri shut this god up by sewing his lips together after he steals Sif's hair. This god mated with the stallion Svadilfari to mother the eightlegged horse Sleipnir. For 10 points, name this father of Fenrir, the Norse god of trickery.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 92 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 8 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 61451

Question: When Soorapadman assumed the guise of a mango tree, one of these objects was used to split the tree in two. Lleu Llaw Gyffes could only be slain with one of these objects if he had one foot on a goat's back and the other in a cauldron. A poisoned one mortally wounded Bran the Blessed, while a (*) barbed one was crafted from a sea monster's bones. King Arthur owned one weapon of this type named Ron. Another one was made from Yggdrasil's wood. For 10 points, identify this type of weapon exemplified by Cuchulainn's Gae Bulg and Odin's Gungnir.

ANSWER: spears

Result: 93 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: 9 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 61466

Question: At a wedding, this man slew the centaur Eurytus. One of this man's children seduced Laodice during the Trojan War, and died of a snakebite near Olynthus. Another of his children was conceived atop a bed of asparagus with the maid Perigune. This father of Acamas and Melanippus defeated a king of Eleusis named (*) Cercyon in a wrestling match, and used a stretching table to dismember the bandit Procrustes on his way to find his father in Athens. For 10 points, name this son of Aegeus, who descended into the Labyrinth to slay the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 94 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: Finals1 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 61565

Question: Adherents to this belief system put iron scissors in bodies and built "corpse-doors" to prevent the dead from awakening. Adam of Bremen described three statues of deities at a major temple of this belief system, whose modern enthusiasts practice drinking rituals called sumbels and sacrifices called blóts, especially around (*) Yuletide. Ásatrú is a movement to revive this belief system, which feared undead called draugar and had a major center of worship at Uppsala. For 10 points, name this belief system that worshipped deities like Frigg and Thor.

ANSWER: Norse paganism [or Scandinavian paganism; or Norse mythology; or Norse Neopaganism; prompt on Germanic paganism or paganism or Neopaganism less specific terms]

Result: 95 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: Finals1 | Question: 23 | Mythology | NoneID: 61574

Question: When Herse blocked the doorway to one of these places, Hermes turned her to stone. Upon waking up, a hero who had slept in one of these places found a golden girdle in his hands. A wooden statue was knocked over when a woman was forcibly removed from one of these locations. (*) Poseidon raped Stheno and Euryale's sister in one of these places and Ajax the Lesser raped Cassandra after dragging her out of one of them. Medusa was transformed into a hideous monster in  for 10 points  what sort of location honoring the goddess of wisdom?

ANSWER: temples to Pallas Athena [accept anything mentioning both "temple" and "Athena"; prompt on temples with "to which deity?"]

Result: 96 | Missouri Open | 2015 | Round: Finals2 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 61595

Question: A serpent consumes this many sparrows before turning to stone in the woods near Aulis. Turnus evades the Trojans by jumping into the Tiber at the end of this book of the Aeneid. Hercules wrestles with the river god Achelous in this book of Ovid's Metamorphoses; he also retrieves the girdle of the Amazonian queen (*) Hippolyta on this numbered labor. The Iliad begins after this many years of fighting. Terpsichore, Melpomene, and Erato were members of a group of this many gods birthed by Mnemosyne. For 10 points, give this number of Muses.

ANSWER: nine

Result: 97 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 1 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 58504

Question: Most of the reign of this city's mythical king Labdacus was actually overseen by the regents Nycteus and Lycus. After leaving this city, one of its kings became the ruler of the Enchelei. A queen of this city was deified under the name Leucothea after leaping into the sea holding her son Melicertes. No king of this city appears in the Iliad due to Telephus's earlier killing of Thersander. The walls of this city were built using the magic lyre-playing of (*) Amphion, who co-ruled it with his brother Zethus. This city, the subject of an epic by Statius, was founded by a man who followed a cow marked with a half-moon to a spot near the Ismenian spring, where he killed a dragon and sowed its teeth to produce the Spartoi. For 10 points, name this Boeotian city founded by Cadmus, which under Eteocles fought an army led by Polynices and six others.

ANSWER: Thebes [or Thebai]

Result: 98 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 10 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 59337

Question: This man ate all the food and drink in Celliwig in the first of the Three Unrestrained Ravagings. One source claims that this man's actions forced his father to return early from his campaign against the Roman emperor Lucius. Another source claims that he survived a shipwreck after being born on May Day. A rebellion led by this man's two sons, one of whom is named Melehan, is put down by Constantine. Early sources list him as the son of Anna and King (*) Lot of Orkney, while later sources consider him an illegitimate son of a different version of Anna and a man who killed him at the battle of Camlann. With his brother Agravain, he exposed the affair between Lancelot and Guinevere, and he later tried to usurp the throne of Britain. For 10 points, name this illegitimate son of Morgause and King Arthur.

ANSWER: Mordred [or Modred; or Medraut]

Result: 99 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 11 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 59361

Question: Various local myths describe this god carrying a ram on his shoulders around a city to avert a plague, explaining his epithet "kriophoros". During Heracles's eighth labor, he was assisted by a son of this god named Abderus who was eaten by Diomedes's mares. At the beginning of The Eumenides, Apollo places Orestes under the protection of this god. One of this god's sons was unwillingly seduced by, and then fused with, the nymph Salmacis. Zeus ordered this god to lull the giant (*) Argos Panoptes to sleep. With Chione, this god fathered Autolycus, and later he brought the magic herb moly to his great-grandson Odysseus. Shortly after he was born, he stole Apollo's cattle; as an apology, he invented, and gave to Apollo, the lyre. For 10 points, name this winged-sandal-wearing Greek messenger god.

ANSWER: Hermes [or Mercury until "Greek" is read]

Result: 100 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 12 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 59374

Question: A daughter of this woman dumped her husband Echemus in favor of the Dulichian king Phyleus. This mother of Timandra had two sons who feuded with Idas and Lynceus over the Leucippides. Her sisters were Amphiaraus's mother Hypermnestra and Meleager's mother Althaea, and her father was the Aetolian king Thestius. A story about one of this woman's daughters claims that that daughter actually came from an (*) egg produced by Nemesis. Stories vary about the mortality of some of her children, depending on which ones are said to be the actual offspring of her husband Tyndareus. For 10 points, name this mother of Clytemnestra, Castor, Pollux, and Helen of Troy, who was impregnated by Zeus in the form of a swan.

ANSWER: Leda

Result: 101 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 13 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 59396

Question: One of these characters threatens to flood a mountain pass but is mollified when his foe commits suicide and gives his bones to his parents. Decorative motifs often depict one or more of the "nine sons" of these figures. One of these characters loses both his third son and his lizardlike servant Li Gen to the warrior deity Nezha. In a different story, that one of these characters offers a seemingly-useless iron pillar that turns out to be a size-changing magical staff to (*) Sun Wukong. Ao Guang is one of the four kings of these beings that rule over the four oceans. These creatures are the yang counterpart to the yin fenghuang. For 10 points, identify these creatures, the only mythical beings represented in the Chinese zodiac.

ANSWER: Chinese dragons [or long; or dragon kings; accept "that's a fucking Chinese myth dragon"]

Result: 102 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 14 (Finals 1) | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 59417

Question: The viceroy Setau built a temple dedicated to this god called Gerf Hussein that is now located at New Kalabsha. This god absorbed many of the aspects of the older Sokar and Tatenen, and he was often depicted carrying a staff that combined the was, the djed, and the ankh. In a temple of this god, Shabaka supposedly discovered a papyrus that described how this god gave (*) names to all things. Ramses II's successor was named in part for this god, who was said to be the father of Imhotep and who was the earliest deity heralded by the Apis bull. He was worshipped as part of a triad with his son Nefertum and his wife Sekhmet. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of craftsmen, the chief god of Memphis.

ANSWER: Ptah

Result: 103 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 15 (Finals 2) | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 59437

Question: This character's home is where a slip from a ladder results in the death of Elpenor. In the Argonautica, Jason and Medea ask this person to purify them of the murder of Absyrtus. In the Metamorphoses, this woman's affections are spurned by Picus in favor of his wife Canens. A lost epic describes how one of this woman's sons accidentally kills his father with a stingray's tail. Like Pasiphae, she was a daughter of Perse and Helios, though some stories instead call her a daughter of (*) Hecate. This mother of Telegonus loved Glaucus, causing her to turn her rival Scylla into a sea-monster. Only Eurylochus abstains from following Polites into this character's palace on Aeaea, where she turns that group of Odysseus's men into swine. For 10 points, name this Greek enchantress.

ANSWER: Circe

Result: 104 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 2 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 58521

Question: One of this god's sons, Tenages, was murdered by four of his other sons; those five, along with Ochimus and Cercaphus, were the seven sons of this god and the nymph Rhode who drove the Telkhines out of Rhodes. Heracles profusely apologized for angrily firing an arrow at this god and was in turn rewarded with a trip to Erytheia in this god's giant golden cup. The island of Thrinacia was sacred to this god, and was where his daughters Lampetia and Phaethusa lived. That island was also home to a (*) herd of oxen sacred to this god, some of which were eaten by Odysseus's crew. This son of Hyperion was often conflated by post-Homeric writers with Apollo. In the most famous story about him, he unwisely vowed to let his son Phaethon drive his chariot. For 10 points, name this Titan of the sun.

ANSWER: Helios [or Helius]

Result: 105 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 59025

Question: During his travels, this character asks why an earlier figure hadn't simply built a bridge out of arrows, prompting a contest in which he builds bridges that a god attempts to destroy. This character teaches music and dancing to the princess Uttara while living under the female alias Brihannala. During a pilgrimage, he married Chitrangada, Subhadra, and the naga princess Ulupi. He used Shikhandi, whose sex had been changed, as a shield in order to defeat the nearly-invincible (*) Bhishma. This wielder of Gandiva passed a test involving shooting a golden fish's eye while looking at its reflection, thus winning the hand of Draupadi. On the seventeenth day of the Kurukshetra War, he killed Karna. For 10 points, name this strongest of the Pandavas, whose dialogue with his charioteer Krishna forms the Bhagavad Gita.

ANSWER: Arjuna

Result: 106 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 4 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 59036

Question: A color-changing calf in this man's herds was discovered by Polyeidos, who also found an herb to resurrect this man's son Glaucus. Later mythographers claimed that there were two versions of this character, a "good" one and a "bad" one, whose rules were separated by that of Lycastus. While waging war on Megara, he convinced Scylla to cut an invulnerability-granting lock of hair off of King Nisus. Like his half-brother Aeacus and his brother Rhadamanthys, he became a (*) judge of the dead. He died after having boiling water poured over him by the daughters of Cocalus, who were protecting Daedalus from him. This father of Ariadne and Phaedra demanded that king Aeacus send him 14 youths every year as tribute to feed a monster living in his labyrinth. For 10 points, name this husband of Pasiphae, a king of Crete.

ANSWER: Minos

Result: 107 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 5 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 59180

Question: These people associated the planet Venus with a goddess of dawn, flowers, and virginity who was named Chasca. According to this people's myth system, the current race of humans replaced an earlier, stupider race of giants that had been made from stone. Their underworld is populated by a race of demons who share a collective name with their leader, Supay. Many of these people's myths survived through the writings of (*) Garcilaso de la Vega. In a myth of these people, the Milky Way was stored in a jug that produced rain when hit by the slingshot of their god Ilyapa. Their mythical first ruler, Manco Capac, was sent to earth by the sun god Inti. For 10 points, Viracocha was the creator god of which pre-Columbian civilization, which built temples at Cuzco and Machu Picchu?

ANSWER: Incans [or Incan mythology]

Result: 108 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 6 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 59238

Question: This character reacts to an eagle greedily eating all four legs of an ox by striking the eagle with a huge pole, only to have the pole stick to the eagle's back, resulting in his being dragged around. In another story, he borrows a net from Ran and uses it to imprison Andvari. This god transforms Idunn into a nut while rescuing her from Thjazi. He refuses Bragi's offer of a horse, sword, and ring and kills Aegir's servant Fimafeng in a poem in which he (*) insults almost all of the other gods. He loses an eating contest against a personification of fire while visiting the court of a jotun with Thjalfi and Thor. He and Heimdall will kill each other at Ragnarok, where his children Fenrir and Jormungandr will also die. For 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki Laufeyarson

Result: 109 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 7 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 59274

Question: This deity saved Iakhos, the son of Aura, who was driven mad after being raped by Dionysus at this deity's request. The Elaphebolia and the Mounikhia were festivals dedicated to this deity, who had a major cult center at Brauron. Hermes and Apollo's affections prompted Chione to foolishly claim that she was prettier than this goddess. She covered herself in mud to thwart the advances of Alpheus, from whom she also rescued the nymph (*) Arethusa. Calchas advised Agamemnon to propitiate this goddess by sacrificing Iphigenia. This goddess sent a boar to ravage Calydon and shot the daughters of Niobe, who had claimed that her children were superior to this goddess's mother Leto. For 10 points, name this twin sister of Apollo, the Greek goddess of the hunt.

ANSWER: Artemis [or Diana until "Greek" is read]

Result: 110 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 8 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 59296

Question: According to one source, tribute to this god was paid through three holes in a burial mound in which his body was hidden for the three years prior to his death. This father of the legendary king Fjölnir received as a teething gift the land of Alfheim. The Yngling dynasty claimed descent from this god, who was born in his father's abode of Noatun. This god goes to the grove of Barri to meet a daughter of Gymir, as arranged by his servant (*) Skirnir. He kills the giant Beli with an antler after giving up his sword, which can fight on its own, during his wooing of the giantess Gerd. His possessions include the golden boar Gullinbursti and the foldable ship Skidbladnir. For 10 points, name this Vanir god of fertility, whose twin sister is a similarly-named goddess of love.

ANSWER: Freyr [or Yngve; do not accept "Freya"]

Result: 111 | MUT | 2015 | Round: 9 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 59302

Question: This god's affair with Chryse produced the Lapith king Phlegyas. The namesake founders of four Thracian tribes, including Edonus and Biston, resulted from this god's affair with the muse Calliope, while two of his other sons led the Orchomenian contingent at Troy. This god's retinue included Alala, the Machai, his daughter Adrestia, and his lover Enyo. He was stopped from killing Heracles in revenge for that man's defeat of this god's son Cycnus. A daughter of this god was given a (*) cursed necklace as a wedding gift from Hephaestus. In the Iliad, Athena aided Diomedes in wounding this god. Alectryon was turned into a rooster after failing to prevent the discovery of this god's affair with Aphrodite. For 10 points, name this father of Harmonia, Phobos, and Deimos, the Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares [or Mars until "Greek" is read]

Result: 112 | PACE NSC | 2015 | Round: 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57152

Question: In a Teutonic myth, this god is slain by the sword belonging to the forest troll Miming (MIM-ing). This god lends his name to a poem that ends with the traveler Vegtam having his true identity revealed. One of this god's possessions can only be moved by a woman who rides a giant wolf bridled by snakes. A battle of wits ends when the words that were once (*) whispered into this god's ear cannot be identified by Vafthrudnir. Plans to retrieve this deity go awry when the jotun Thokk refuses to weep. This god's mother Frigg makes all but one substance in the world promise never to harm this god. For 10 paints, name this brother of Hoder, a Norse god who dies when Loki strikes him with a spear of mistletoe.

ANSWER: Balder [or Baldr, or Baldur]

Result: 113 | PACE NSC | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 57506

Question: In one of these people's myths, a thief opens nested bronze, iron, sycamore, ivory, silver and a gold boxes to access and all-powerful book. This people believed that a frog-headed goddess breathes life into a new born after her husband spins them on his potter's wheel. The chief god of this people mixes red dye with beer to prevent a lion-headed goddess from destroying (*) humanity, and s cowed by the lewd dancing of his daughter into revealing his own name. In their most extensive myth, a goddess reassembles her husband from the fourteen pieces of his body. Because it is Bast's animal form, these people considered cats sacred. For 10 points, name this people, whose falcon-headed god Horus ensured the divinity of the pharaoh.

ANSWER: Ancient Egyptians

Result: 114 | PACE NSC | 2015 | Round: 4 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57781

Question: For lying to this deity, Galanthis is turned into a weasel. Biton and Clobis pull a cart for 45 stadia to a festival dedicated to this deity, who rewards them by allowing them to die in their sleep. This goddess transforms Lamia into a child-eating demon and strikes Athamas with insanity, casing his wife Ino to leap in to the ocean. This goddess loses a contest over whether men or women (*) enjoy sex more. A cloud-like imitation of this goddess named Nephele is the target of Ixion's affections. This goddess takes away Echo's voice, and orders the hundred-eyed watchman Argos to guard a cow that she later torments with a stinging gadfly because it is her husband's lover Io. For 10 points, name this jealous wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera [or Juno]

Result: 115 | PACE NSC | 2015 | Round: 5 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57793

Question: This person once poisons a mantle richly decorated with precious stones, but the gift is not delivered since its bearer is burnt to coals. In another story, this person makes a replica of an object that protects its bearer from dying from blood loss, giving the real one to Sir Accalon of Gaul. This person is described peddling healing ointments at the wedding of Erec and Enide by Chretien de Troyes, who calls her a "chief physician." This unhappy wife of Urien gives her name to a (*) mirage seen off the coast of Sicily. She unsuccessfully competes for the affection of Lancelot with Guinevere. Along with Morgause, this woman is a daughter of Igraine and Gorlois, making her a half sister to Arthur. For 10 points, name this wicked sorceress in Arthurian myth.

ANSWER: Morgan le Fey [or Morgane; or Morgaine; or Fata Morgana]

Result: 116 | PACE NSC | 2015 | Round: 6 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57880

Question: In the Argonautica, Polydeuces kills the Bebrycian king Amycus with a pair of these objects made of cowhide. In the Aeneid, Entellus wins a contest using a cestus, an object of this kind. In the Gylfaginning, one of these objects owned by Utgard-Loki turns out to the "great hall" in which Thor and his servants had experienced earthquakes during the night. A set of these objects had to be used because a gadfly sent by Loki distracted Brokkr and forced him to make a (*) weapon's handle much shorter than it should have been. The belt Megingjorth, a hammer, and a set of these objects named Jarngreipr are the most important possessions of the Norse god of thunder. For 10 points, name these items of clothing, an iron pair of which enables Thor to grasp Mjolnir

ANSWER: gloves [or gauntlets]

Result: 117 | PACE NSC | 2015 | Round: 6 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 57896

Question: This woman is advised to remain silent while passing old women weaving and a lame man driving a mule laden with sticks, and has sleep extracted from her face and placed in a box. This woman births the goddess of sensual pleasure, a companion of the Graces named Voluptas. This woman, whose story was first told in Apuleius's The Golden Ass, slips from a dragon-infested cliff from which black water pours, lets briers collect the golden (*) wool of the Sun, and receives a crust of bread after accepting the aid of insects who sort a huge pile of grains for her. Her envious sisters convince her to sneak in a lamp to a liaison with her lover, betraying her promise to never look upon his face. For 10 points, name this nemesis of Venus, a woman who falls in love with Cupid.

ANSWER: Psyche

Result: 118 | PACE NSC | 2015 | Round: 8 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 59141

Question: This man terrorizes the island of Paros until its inhabitants agree to hand over two grandsons of Minos to serve as his companions. This man bursts out of the shackles placed upon him by Busiris, an Egyptian king who sacrifices all visitors to his realm. This man is cheated out of one-tenth of the cattle promised to him by a king whom he deposes and replaces with Phyleus. This man gets his toe pinched by a crab during a fight in which he tells his (*) nephew Iolaus use a torch to cauterize several stumps. In another adventure, this man diverts two rivers. To atone for murdering his own family, this man helps a king who hides in a bronze jar, Eurystheus, by cleaning the Augean stables and killing the Hydra. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who completes Twelve Labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 119 | PACE NSC | 2015 | Round: 9 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 61304

Question: Hesiod reports that the men of the Golden Age lived in the air after undergoing this action, whereas the men of the Silver Age stayed on the ground. Athena changes her mind about performing it on Tydeus when she saw him devour the brains of Melanippus. Metanira interrupts an instance of this action by stumbling upon her son Demophon inside the family hearth. This action is performed on a man who became a cicada because (*) Eos forgets to request eternal youth. Peleus interrupts the best-known instance of this action, which alternately takes the form of Thetis anointing her son with ambrosia and placing him atop a fire, or by dipping him in the river Styx. For 10 points, name this action that is nearly completely conferred upon Achilles, save for his heel.

ANSWER: mortals becoming immortal [or men becoming gods; or deification; or becoming invulnerable, accept synonyms]

Result: 120 | PACE NSC | 2015 | Round: Round 2 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57493

Question: The footnote "demon speaking from here on" appears in this text after a narrative about how a hailstorm immediately extinguishes divinely-granted fire. One character in this text dies after eating a bird poisoned with white earth. Its protagonists trick their half-brothers into climbing an endlessly-growing tree. In this text, animals, mud and wood are used in three failed attempts at (*) creating mankind. In this text, two characters survive the Houses of Gloom and Knives, but one of them is decapitated int he House of Bats by Camazotz. Vacub-Caquix, Cabrakan, and Zipacna are defeated in this text, whose protagonists are called to Xibalba for playing a ball-game too loudly. For 10 points, name this compilation of stories about the Hero Twins, and other Mayan myths.

ANSWER: Popol Vuh [or Popol Wuj]

Result: 121 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 1 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 60488

Question: The last part of this deity's name can either be written as a sitting woman or an egg, and this deity is sometimes depicted as holding a sycamore tree or a lotus. Though it's not Demeter, this goddess tried to make a prince immortal by placing him in a fire, but was thwarted by the child's mother. This goddess was the protector of the patron of the south named Imsety (im-SET-ee). A symbol of this god was called her (*) "Buckle" or "Blood," and it is a knot-shaped symbol called the tyet (tee-ET). This goddess created the first scorpion in an attempt to discover Ra's secret name, and used this to force him to give up power in favor of her husband, the "foremost of the Westerners" who was murdered by his brother Set. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the wife of Osiris and the mother of Horus.

ANSWER: Isis [or Iset]

Result: 122 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 10 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 60843

Question: This god once told another deity that her kindness was fake, causing her to cry blood for 52 years. Karl Taube and Mary Miller describe this entity as "the embodiment of change through conflict," and his alternate names included "We his Slaves" and "Precious Turkey." By decapitating Tata and Nene, this deity was responsible for the creation of the first dogs. He disguised himself as an old man and tricked his brother into getting (*) drunk, breaking his religious vows. This deity and his brother defeated Cipactli (see-PACT-lee), who ate his foot, leading him to make a new foot out of obsidian. This deity ruled over the age of the first sun, after which he was overthrown and turned into a jaguar. For 10 points, name this Aztec god whose name meant "Smoking Mirror" and who fought with his brother Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca

Result: 123 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 11 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 60845

Question: It's not Thasos, but according to Pausanias, an athlete from this city called Kleitomachus (KLI-toh-MACK-us) won pankration (pan-KRA-tee-on), boxing, and wrestling at the Isthmian Games. Forces from here were victorious after the enemy, lacking distinctive shields, turned on each other in an early case of friendly fire, resulting in a victory for Pagondas (puh-GONE-duss) at the Battle of Delium. This city's tension with Athens grew after Athens declared support for its regional rival (*) Plataea. As a result, this city sided with Sparta during the Peloponnesian War, but later defeated them with an oblique formation at the battles of Tegyra (tuh-JEE-ruh) and Leuctra (LEWK-truh) under a leader who later died at Mantinea (MAN-tin-AY-uh). At the battle of Chaeronea (CARE-oh-NAY-uh), Philip II of Macedon, a former prisoner in this city, defeated its elite unit of 300 gay lovers, the Sacred Band. For 10 points, name this Greek city once led by Epaminondas (EPP-uh-min-NON-dus), a frequent leader of the Boeotian League, which according to legend, was founded by Cadmus.

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 124 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 11 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 60854

Question: In the Gesta Danorum (GAY-stuh day-NO-rum), King Hadingus finds a river full of weapons in one of these locations, and a creepy woman tosses the head of a rooster over an impenetrable wall. In the mythology of Mangaia, this kind of location is compared to the hollow of a coconut shell. Varima-te-takere, mother goddess, lives in one of these places, and names for this kind of location in Chinese myth include "Court of Yanluo" and "nine springs." Odin rides to one of these places to determine the meaning of Baldr's (*) nightmares, and Vainamoinen is able to escape from one only by turning into a snake. The ruler of one of these places twice had sex for six days straight with her future husband; that couple was Ereshkigal and Nergal. Amaterasu, Susanowo, and Tsukuyomi were born after Izanagi's return from one of these places. For 10 points, name these locations ruled over by Yama and Hel.

ANSWER: underworlds [or hells; accept specific answers like Yomi, hell, Hel, land of the dead, etc.]

Result: 125 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 12 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 60867

Question: One group of creatures known for their prowess at this activity turned white and dove into the sea at Aptera. During the Dreamtime, creator spirits moved across the world in "lines" named for this activity. Another person proficient at this activity was offered sex for nine nights if he could win a contest; instead, that student of Linus named (*) Thamyris (tuh-MY-riss) was blinded. Joukahainen (YO-cuh-HIGH-nin) and Vainamoinen (VAY-nuh-MOY-nin) engage in a contest of this activity, after which Joukahainen sinks into a bog. A decapitated head continued to do this action even after its body was torn apart by the Maenads (MAY-nads). In order to counter one instance of this activity, a commander orders himself tied to the mast of a ship while his crew stuffed wax into their ears. For 10 points, name this action performed by the sirens to lure sailors into crashing.

ANSWER: singing [accept "music," though the clues are all about singing; accept word forms like "song"; do NOT accept things like "playing the lyre", as they are not singing]

Result: 126 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 13 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 60884

Question: This man was killed by a man who had eaten a stew of snake venom and wolf flesh. In another story, this man's future wife resolves not to marry after she dreams of a falcon being killed by two eagles; that wife is a princess of Burgundy who is murdered by Hildebrand. This man tested the sharpness of his sword by cutting a tuft of wool in the river, and cut the chain mail off of a (*) sleeping woman, a daughter of Budli who was cursed by Odin after turning a battle for Agnar. This man tries to obtain the Otter's Gold, which was involved in a strange form of taxidermy when the Aesir used it to stuff Otr's skin. That treasure is guarded by a figure who owns the cursed ring Andvaranaut, and whose blood allows this man to understand the language of birds. For 10 points, name this wielder of Gram and slayer of Fafnir, the hero of the Völsunga Saga and the Nibelungenlied (nee-buh-LUNG-en-leed).

ANSWER: Sigurd or Siegfried

Result: 127 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 15 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 60942

Question: In the Argonautica, this man's body is said to emit smoke and a terrible stench that the birds couldn't avoid. A lover of this man wept for him until his gray hair turned into gray feathers. This man was taunted by Epaphus after a foot-race. This man sees a set of silver doors with a representation of the cosmos and zodiac on it. In their grief, this man's sisters turned into poplar trees that cried amber tears. This figure fell into the river (*) Eridanus after Zeus struck him with a thunderbolt; before that, this son of Clymene claimed one promise from his father, which led to Africa being turned into a desert. For 10 points, name this son of Helios who asked to drive his father's sun chariot.

ANSWER: Phaethon

Result: 128 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 2 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 60557

Question: The goddess of fertility in this mythological system has a name deriving from the word "to bathe." In one myth from this belief system, the harvest is due to the incestuous relationship between Yarilo and Morena, and winter comes after Morena throws Yarilo down into the underworld for his unfaithfulness. After driving his enemy into the underworld, one god in this myth system shouted "that is your place! Stay there!" This mythology includes demons like the shishiga, which lives in the (*) Kama River and harasses drunkards as well as the bagiennik. In this mythology, the blacksmith Svarog may be father to Dazbog (DAJ-bog) and Svarozig, who represented fire in the sun and on Earth respectively. Another figure in this myth system flies around using a mortar and pestle and lives in a house with chicken legs. For 10 points, name this myth system which includes Veles, Perun, and Baba Yaga.

ANSWER: Slavic mythology [accept more specific answers like "Russian"]

Result: 129 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 60648

Question: These figures live in a land where everything is the exact opposite of the earth and which is accessed through the poteau mitan (puh-TOW mee-TAN). One of these figures presides over the chanting done during ordeal by fire, or the canzo. These figures are often split into the "Rada" types, which are more benevolent, and the "Petro" types, which are more aggressive. Another one of these figures, whose name means "great wood," forms a trinity with two others whose names refer to graveyards and (*) crossroads. One of these figures wears three wedding rings representing her three husbands; those husbands include one called "Shell of the Sea" and "Golden Shell," and are Agwe (UG-way), Ogoun (OH-goon), and Damballa (dum-BALL-uh). Another one of these figures is the leader of the Guédé (guh-WAY-day) and is the husband of Maman Brigitte (muh-MAN bruh-JEET); that one of these figures is depicted in a top hat and tuxedo and named Baron Samedi (suh-MAY-dee). For 10 points, name these spirits from Voodoo mythology.

ANSWER: Loas [or Lwas]

Result: 130 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 4 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 60695

Question: Ndengei (nuh-DEN-gay), the Fijian (FEE-jee-an) creator-god, was depicted as one of these animals. In Korean mythology, a girl who became pregnant out of wedlock was thrown in a box and became one of these creatures; that goddess of wealth is Chil-seong-shin, the Jeju (CHAY-jew) equivalent of Eopsin ("up shin"). In another mythology, the progenitor of these creatures challenged her sister Vinata (vin-AH-ta) to guess the color of a divine horse's tail; that queen of them is Kadru (CAD-rue). Uttu told another one of these creatures to hide in a bull's corpse to hide from an (*) eagle. Artemis filled the bridal chamber of Alcestis (all-CEST-is) and Admetus (ad-MEET-us) with these creatures, and they are often depicted as giving humans gifts by licking their ears; examples include Melampus and Asclepius (us-KLEE-pee-us). In Hinduism, the nagas take this form. For 10 points, name these animals, two of which appear on Hermes' caduceus and one of which was slain by Apollo at Delphi.

ANSWER: snakes [or serpents; or dragons; accept nagas before mention; accept more specific answers]

Result: 131 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 5 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 60733

Question: This woman has a dream in which her lover is replaced by Iollan the Fair and is decapitated. While journeying home, this woman is tormented by a vision of a cloud of blood appearing over a palace. Late in life, this person is forced to spend a year with the warrior that she detests most. This figure's guardian, Leabharcham (LAU-er-cum), interprets the appearance of a raven to indicate that this figure's lover is a child of Usnech (USH-nuk). A (*) fidchell piece damaged the eye of Gelbann, a warrior who was sent to spy on this figure. Cathbad was present at the birth of this woman, and made a prophecy about her. This woman's lover, Noisiu (NEE-sheh), was killed by the soldiers of King Conchobar; afterwards, she kills herself by jumping from a chariot, thus partly instigating the Cattle Raid of Cooley. For 10 points, name this woman whose beauty caused much sorrow for Ireland.

ANSWER: Deirdre

Result: 132 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 6 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 60747

Question: In one work, this character claims "I am scorched like wax torches dipped in sulfur" and in another work is compared to a wounded deer. This character insults another by saying that he was born from a rock and nursed by Hyrcanian (her-KEY-nee-un) tigers. Upon this woman's death, her sister laments that "the same sadness and the same hour should have killed us both." This woman lives in a city which is compared to a beehive, which she obtained by outlining land with a bull's hide. She refused (*) Iarbas (YAR-bas) as a lover but has sex with another man after taking shelter from a storm in a cave. She absconded with the gold of her husband Sychaeus (si-KEE-us), who was killed by her brother Pygmalion. This sister of Anna swears a vow of chastity but finally falls in love with Ascanius' (as-KAY-nee-us) father. After he leaves, this Phoenician (fi-NEE-shun) woman burns his belongings on a funeral pyre and stabs herself. For 10 points, name this founder of Carthage and lover of Aeneas (i-NEE-us).

ANSWER: Dido [accept Elissa]

Result: 133 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 7 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 60766

Question: One god in this myth system was a multicolored animal herder who was associated with the constellation Lyra. One man in this myth system had a name meaning "salt," and could shoot down hills with his slingshot; that man's sister taught women how to spin thread, and his father was sometimes described as a god who travelled the earth disguised as a beggar while working miracles, and whose name means "sea foam." The supreme god in this mythological system used a (*) flood to destroy a group of idiots made from giant rocks, and he was later surpassed in importance by his son, a sun god who told his children to settle where a golden staff sank into the earth. For 10 points, name this mythological system whose gods included Viracocha (VEER-uh-KOH-chuh) and Inti, which were worshiped at sites like Cuzco.

ANSWER: Inca mythology

Result: 134 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 8 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 60797

Question: Anyone who looks at the moon during the holiday celebrating this god's birthday will be falsely accused; that holiday is known as Vinayak Chaturthi (veen-EYE-ak cha-TOOR-tee). This figure once blocked Parashurama's (puh-RAH-shu-RAH-mah) path, leading Parashurama to attack him with his axe. This god's forms, which includes several with multiple heads and/or holding a pot of gems, are 32 in number listed in the (*) Mudgala Purana. This god, who transcribed the Mahabharata (mah-HAH-BAH-raht-uh) from Vyasa (vee-AAS-uh), once was challenged by his war-god brother to a race around the world, which he won by simply running around his parents. This brother of Skanda was created by his mother when she breathed life into the tumeric paste she used for bathing; while guarding his mother Parvati, Shiva decapitated him and later gave him his most notable feature. For 10 points, name this Hindu god and "remover of obstacles," who has the head of an elephant.

ANSWER: Ganesha

Result: 135 | Penn Bowl | 2015 | Round: 9 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 60813

Question: This figure once gave birth to a god meaning "heaven opposing everything" by spitting out his rage. One of this god's actions caused another figure to accidentally kill herself by hitting herself in the vagina with a weaving shuttle. This man once shot an arrow into the middle of a field, then set the field on fire as a test. This god once tested his future son-in-law by forcing him to sleep in rooms filled with snakes and scorpions. He won a contest against one of his siblings after his sister birthed three women from his (*) sword, and later upset that sister by throwing a flayed pony at one of her attendants. After using a strong sake to defeat the dragon Yamata no Orochi, he gained the sword Kusanagi (KOO-suh-NAH-gi), which he gave to his sister, who had hidden herself in a cave. For 10 points, name this Shinto god of the sea and storms and brother of Amaterasu (ah-MAH-ter-AH-soo).

ANSWER: Susanowo [or Takehaya Susanoo-no-Mikoto; or ]

Result: 136 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 1 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 60382

Question: The first one of these figures was created when the mists of Niflheim met the heat of Muspelheim. Another one of these figures owned a horse named Gullfaxi, which he claimed was faster than the eight-legged Sleipnir, and drove a whetstone into Thor's forehead. Thor is also challenged by one of these figures to wrestle with old age and empty a drinking horn connected to the sea. Utgard-Loki is one of these figures, and an army of them attributed to fire and will lead armies to attack Asgard during Ragnarok. The "frost" variety of these figures frequently war with the gods. For 10 points, name this large mythological race also known as Jotunn in Norse.

ANSWER: giants [accept jotunn before mention]

Result: 137 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 10 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 61060

Question: This man named his son Megapenthes, or "great sorrow," because he has no legitimate male heir. This man is shot by Pandarus after a duel stopped by Aphrodite but recovers and plays an important role in retrieving the body of Patroclus. This father of Hermione learns that he will go to Elysium after his death because he is the son-in-law of Zeus. This man wears the skin of a seal to ambush and wrestle the shapeshifter Proteus in order to convince that god to tell him how to get home from Troy. For 10 points, name this King of Sparta, the brother of Agamemnon and husband of Helen.

ANSWER: Menelaus

Result: 138 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 11 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 61065

Question: This god once lunged at an eagle with a branch, only to be swept into the sky by that eagle. This god bet the dwarves Brokkr and Sindri that they were less skilled than the Sons of Ivaldi. Despite sabotaging that contest by stinging Brokkr's eyelid, this god lost that bet, so he had his mouth sewn shut. Thiazi threatened to kill this god unless he kidnapped Idun, and when snake venom drips on this god's face, he writhes in pain and causes earthquakes. Along with Hödr, this god was responsible for Balder's death. The giant Fárbauti was this god's father, and this god spawned the offspring Hel, Jörmungand, and Fenrir. For 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 139 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 12 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 61104

Question: A rope dipped in yellow soil was flung by Nuwa to perform this action. Odin, Vili, and Ve use the trunks of an ash and elm tree to perform this action, which in another myth system is performed by Susanoo after swallowing jewels from the necklace of Amaterasu. After a flood ends the Bronze Age, Deucalion and Pyrrha cast the bones of Gaia behind them to perform this action. Because Epimetheus gave away too many good traits to animals, the arts of civilization had to be stolen before this action was performed by Prometheus with clay. For 10 points, name this action performed with dust in the Bible that resulted in Adam.

ANSWER: creation of man [accept other answers involving something causing humans/people to exist]

Result: 140 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 2 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 60454

Question: The eight-pointed star is a sacred symbol of this deity, who was hit in the face by a bull's torn-off thigh. An intersex creature is created to revive this deity, who is cursed with sixty diseases. When this goddess journeyed to her sister's domain to rescue Tammuz, all sexual activity ceased on Earth, and she had to convince her parents Anu and Antu to release a certain creature. During her trip to the underworld, this goddess had to take off an article of clothing for each gate that she passed through, and she sent the Bull of Heaven to attack Gilgamesh after he refused to be her lover. For 10 points, name this Mesopotamian goddess of love and fertility.

ANSWER: Ishtar [accept Inanna]

Result: 141 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 60503

Question: This god is associated with five mantras like Sadyojata and Vamadeva that manifest as his different forms. This god constantly mocked his wife because of her dark skin, causing Brahma to turn her skin golden. He is frequently worshipped using phallic statues called lingams, and may be depicted with the river Ganges flowing from his hair. As Nataraja, this consort of Parvati balances on the dwarf Apasmara while he dances to end the universe and start the cycle of creation. Able to incinerate his enemies with his third eye, for 10 points, name this destroyer god in Hindu mythology.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 142 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 4 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 60631

Question: This location includes several archipelagos based on Macaronesia, which were called the Isles of the Blessed. Rhadamanthus, Aeacus, and Minos are judges at this location, where Odysseus speaks to Elpenor. After speaking to the Cumaean Sibyl, Aeneas travels to this location, and receives a prophetic vision about the future of Rome. A goddess fell in love with a stream of fire in this place, which contains the river Phlegethon and the dungeon known as Tartarus. Because Persephone consumed six pomegranate seeds while in this location, she was confined to this location for half a year. For 10 points, name this domain in Greek mythology ruled over by Hades.

ANSWER: the Greek underworld [accept Hades before mention]

Result: 143 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 5 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 60669

Question: The only food item in Jahannam is a product of one of these items known as Zaqqum. According to Japanese mythology, if they are harmed blood will gush out of these objects, which are inhabited by Kodama. Because they were hospitable to Zeus and Hermes, Baucis and Philemon were turned into these objects after they died. Osiris's coffin was sealed inside one of these objects, and Daphne turned into one of these objects to escape Apollo's love arrow-induced obsession. For 10 points, name these objects that are possessed by dryads, a type of plant exhibited by Yggdrasil and other world-varieties of them.

ANSWER: trees (prompt on plants, accept specific types such as oak trees or laurel trees, do not accept world tree before "Yggdrasil" )

Result: 144 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 6 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 60967

Question: With either a quoit or a discus, this man killed Acrisius, therefore fulfilling the prophecy of the Oracle of Delphi. During this man's childhood, he and his mother were imprisoned in a wooden chest, which was then cast off into the sea. He also learned the location of the Hesperides from the Graeae, three perpetually old women who shared an eye and a tooth. This man slew the sea serpent Cetus in order to rescue a woman chained to a rock, and defeated his most famous adversary by only looking at her reflection on his shield. For 10 points, name this husband of Andromeda, who killed the Gorgon Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 145 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 7 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 60996

Question: This man's strength was strongest when the sun is at its highest, and he is sometimes referred to as "the Maidens' Knight" due to his status as a defender of women. This pentacle-wearing brother of Mordred became enemies with Lancelot after Lancelot killed the rest of his brothers. He once exchanged kisses for livestock, and secretly accepted a girdle of invincibility from Lady Bertilak. As penance for not keeping a bargain, this man received a nick on his neck. For 10 points, name this Knight of the Round Table who most famously entered into a beheading competition with the Green Knight.

ANSWER: Sir Gawain

Result: 146 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 8 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 61015

Question: In some mysteries this god is also known as Eleutherios, or "the liberator." His mother perished when viewing his father's true form, and in two separate myths, this god was either killed in the womb or eaten by Titans. In both accounts he is resurrected by Zeus, giving him the epithet "of two mothers." He drove a group of his followers to rip apart King Pentheus, who banned his worship. These female followers of this god are known as Bassarids due to this god's tendency to wear a fox or leopard skin, but they are more commonly called Maenads. Frequently associated with satyrs, for 10 points, name this god of wine and festivity also known as Bacchus.

ANSWER: Dionysus

Result: 147 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: 9 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 61034

Question: In one myth, this goddess attempted to enchant the baby Dictys by throwing him in a fire, but was interrupted by an alarmed servant. In another myth, she attacks another god with a cobra fashioned out of clay, causing him to reveal his secret name. Nephthys disguised herself as this goddess in order to seduce Set, resulting in the birth of Anubis. This goddess, who is frequently depicted as wearing a throne as a crown, transformed into a kite to perform an act of resurrection. She had to gather up her husband's fourteen pieces because he was chopped up by Set. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, who was the mother of Horus and wife of Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis

Result: 148 | Prison Bowl | 2015 | Round: Extra Questions | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 61127

Question: One of these things made from the toenails and fingernails of the dead will arrive during Ragnarok. Freyr owned one of these things that was of such fine craftsmanship it could be folded up into a pocket when not in use called Skidbladnir. The supposed greatest of these things was Hringhorni, which was used as Baldr's funeral pyre after his death. Ra traveled through the sky on a morning and an evening one of these things. Horus beat Set in a competition involving these things by constructing one from wood painted to look like stone. For 10 points, name this type of vessel on which Charon transports the dead across the River Styx.

ANSWER: boats [or ships; or barges; or obvious equivalents indicating that a vessel transports things or people through water]

Result: 149 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 1 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57440

Question: Temples to this figure featured a recurring and creepy ear motif on the walls. This figure supplanted the primordial hill Tatenen and his works are recounted in the Shabaka Stone. This god was linked with the lord of the imhet, a harsh region of the underworld, and with a more famous god through his adoption of a spine-like pillar called the Djed. The Serapeum of Saqqara was the burial site for beings sacred to this god. This father of the lion-headed god Maahes and the blue lotus flower, (*) Nefertem, became syncretized with both the falcon god Seker and Osiris. This husband of either Bast or Sekhmet would periodically appear on earth as the distinctly-marked Apis Bull. He was often depicted as a mummified man with a trademark blue skullcap. For 10 points, name this decidedly green-skinned Egyptian god of craftsmen, the chief god of Memphis.

ANSWER: Ptah

Result: 150 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 10 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57673

Question: This man's sister Myrto was the mother of a spirit of glory named Eukleia by Heracles. This man traded a silver mixing-bowl for a supply of wine from King Euneus, to whom he'd sold his captive Lycaon. While attempting to climb a wall, this hero is thrice stopped by Apollo, who later helps Euphorbus wound this man by hitting him on the back. This person went into exile after killing his friend Clysonymus over a game of dice. In an (*) event following this man's death, the cowardly Epeius wins a boxing-match and Diomedes wins a chariot race. This man killed Sarpedon, but shortly afterwards was killed by Hector while leading the Myrmidons in the disguise of his friend. For 10 points, name this friend of Achilles in the Iliad.

ANSWER: Patroclus

Result: 151 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 11 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57684

Question: This goddess is the protagonist of the Lay of Hyndla, in which she helps Ottar search for his ancestry. Hrungnir drunkenly boasted that he would take home Sif and this deity, who presides over Sessrúmnir. This rider of Hildisvíni is described as having had two daughters named Gersemi and Hnoss with her husband Odr. In the Lokasenna, Njord interrupts Loki during a story in which he describes how this goddess was caught in bed with her (*) brother after she farted. This goddess let Loki borrow her falcon cloak to retrieve Idunn, and Thor pretended to be this goddess retrieve Mjölnir and kill Thrym. This owner of Brísingamen takes half of all the dead to her hall of Folkvangr, and owns a chariot pulled by cats. For 10 points, name this member of the Vanir, the sister of Frey and Norse goddess of beauty.

ANSWER: Freyja

Result: 152 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 12 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57708

Question: . The lover of one of these figures was killed in Fjöturlund by a son of Högni. The son of Hjörvard and Sigrlinn loved one of these figures, a child of Eylimi known as Sváfa. That one was reincarnated as the sister of Dagr and became the lover of Helgi Hundingsbane. Three of these figures were taken as the (*) wives of Egil, Slagfid, and Völund. In addition to Sigrún, these figures include the wife of Gunnar, whose hand was won by riding through a ring of fire. That one of these figures threw herself onto the funeral pyre of Sigurd, and was named Brynhild. For 10 points, name these female figures from Norse mythology who bring half of those who die in battle to Valhalla.

ANSWER: valkyries

Result: 153 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 12 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 57740

Question: Prior to a festival dedicated to this god, priests remained nude for eighty days while placing fir branches on the tops of mountains, and the namesake objects of that festival were known as "objects for seeing" for their divination value. This god's quick speed was represented by his attendant Paynal. This god was considered young because, instead of stone, he was frequently depicted using amaranth dough, and he carried a fire serpent who is used as a lightning bolt. The dedicatee of the (*) Panquetzaliztli Festival, this god enveloped his four hundred brothers in clouds and created the Moon when he cut off the head of his sister, Coyolxauhqui. Along with Tlaloc, this god was the dedicatee of the Temple Mayor in Tenochtitlan. This deity supposedly burst from his mother's womb fully armed after that mother, Coatlicue, was impregnated by a ball of feathers. For 10 points, name this Aztec god of the sun and war who was known as the hummingbird god.

ANSWER: Huitzilopochtli

Result: 154 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 14 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 57745

Question: In Egyptian mythology, one of these creatures fertilizes land with his tears. Another one of these creatures is guarded by Kashima, who restrains it with a stone to prevent earthquakes. In addition to Rem and Namazu, one of these creatures slew Hayagriva after warning Manu of an impending flood. Väinämöinen constructed the first kantele from the jawbone of one of these creatures, and Finn Eces spent seven years trying to (*) catch another one of these. After the death of Baldr, Loki took the form of one of these creatures and hid in Fránangr's Falls. Vishnu's first avatar is one of these called Matsya. Finn McCool gained his wisdom after he burned his thumb while cooking one of these. For 10 points, name these creatures that include the giant pike from the Kalevala and the Salmon of Knowledge from Irish mythology.

ANSWER: fish [accept specific answers like pike or salmon or catfish before mentioned]

Result: 155 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 2 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57457

Question: A hunchbacked old man gave this figure a bird costume so that he could fly to a village ruled by an eight-eyed-bat. After euphemistically asking a woman "give me a drink from your gourd," this figure and his father helped lift up the sky. This person became jealous when his brother-in-law made a basket similar to his while on a hunting trip and turned him into a dog. Because he was born prematurely, this figure was bound to a lock of his mother's hair and cast into the (*) ocean. This person used a stone axe to decapitate a giant eel, and once slowed the sun with a lasso made from his sister Hina's hair. He also used fishhook fashioned from a jawbone to pull islands out of sea. For 10 points, name this trickster from Polynesian myth.

ANSWER: Maui

Result: 156 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57534

Question: Those who left boughs on the altar of this deity at the wrong time could be sentenced to death under the laws of the Eumolpidae and the Kerykes families. The Ninnion tablet depicts this deity's son Iacchus leading a procession. Outside of the Telesterion, worshippers of this deity drank a psychedelic barley drink called kykeon. Women honored this deity as the elder of two "law-bearers" in the three-day Thesmophoria festival. This (*) goddess turned Abas into a lizard and accidentally burned the baby Demophon to death while disguised as a wet-nurse at the court of King Celeus. The Sacred Way led from Athens to the cult center of this goddess at Eleusis, which celebrated her gift to Triptolemus. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess who caused winter by grieving for her daughter Persephone.

ANSWER: Demeter [prompt on "Ceres"]

Result: 157 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 4 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57554

Question: One of these figures lives on Mount Haemus and is sometimes equated with Ophion, the serpent who split the Universal Egg in the Pelasgian creation myth. One of these figures names a place whose inhabitants could jump into a lake and turn into swans before dying, and which was home to a prophet who travelled the world on an arrow, Abaris. With Podarge, one of these figures fathered the talking horses Balius and Xanthus. The two (*) sons of one of these gods, Calais and Zetes, chased away the harpies who were plaguing Phineus. One of these gods brought Psyche to Eros's palace and used Apollo's discus to kill their mutual love interest, Hycathinsus. These gods are accidentally released from a bag which Aeolus gives to Odysseus. For 10 points, name these Greek gods collectively known as the Anemoi, who included Boreas and Zephyrus.

ANSWER: wind gods [or the Four Winds; or Anemoi; or Aetai]

Result: 158 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 5 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57569

Question: 8. Two of this figure's sons were killed by a king in front of altars, angering some gods who then caused that king to be killed by his nephew Aurelius Conanus some years later. This man delivers the killing blow to Lamorak, son of King Pellinore. In one account, this figure survived his most well known encounter and instead died of starvation, but not before eating the dead body of Guinevere. All the noble children (*) born on this figure's birthday were set adrift to sea, but this figure survived a shipwreck and was fostered by Nabur. During Arthur's absence, this man seized the throne as well as Guinevere, prompting Arthur to return and fight him at the Battle of Camlann. For 10 points, name this traitor from Arthurian legend, commonly held to be the incestuous son of Arthur and Morgause.

ANSWER: Mordred

Result: 159 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 6 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 57599

Question: A hymn to this figure notes that one who recites it 108 times daily for 108 days will attain liberation, and was composed by Tulsidas. This figure impregnated a fish with a drop of his sweat, leading to the birth of a guard of Patala known as Makardhwaja. Arjuna almost killed himself out of shame after failing this deity's challenge to build a bridge of arrows. Also known as Pavanputra, this son of Anjana and (*) Vayu burned down parts of Lanka after delivering a ring to a captive of Ravana. This figure was one of three to hear Krishna deliver the Bhagavad Gita, as he was displayed on Arjuna's flag. This figure once ripped his chest open to reveal Rama and Sita in his heart. For 10 points, name this monkey god who appears in the Ramayana.

ANSWER: Hanuman [accept Pavanputra before mention; accept Anjaneya or any of Hanuman's million other names]

Result: 160 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 7 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57611

Question: Robert Graves claims that one of these things was actually a magical bag containing a serpent. After seeing two of these objects belonging to Tydeus and Polynices, King Adrastus married his daughters to them. One of these objects was made with either the remains of the winged giant Pallas or the goat Amalthea. After betraying Rome to the Sabines, Tarpeia was crushed to death with these objects. Two (*) cities, one at peace and one at war, are depicted on one of these objects which is described in a notable ekphrasis. Seven bulls' hides were used to make one of these objects which was used by Teucer and his brother Ajax. One of these objects was used as a mirror to defeat Medusa by Perseus. For 10 points, Athena's aegis was what sort of protective object?

ANSWER: shields [or the aegis before mentioned]

Result: 161 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 8 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57633

Question: . This substance forms a dew which dripped off Yggdrasil near a well inhabited by two swans. A boy who drowned in this substance while playing in a cellar was revived using a magic herb by Polyidus. This substance is associated with a man who saved the residents of Ceos from a Dog Star-caused plague and was chasing Eurydice when she was bitten by a snake. Sigmund bites off the tongue of a werewolf after she tries to lick this substance off his (*) face. Daedalus used an ant and some of this substance to thread a string through a seashell. This substance is associated with Aristeus and was put in a drugged cake which Aeneas used to put Cerberus to sleep. This substance was mixed with the blood of Kvasir to create the mead of poetry. For 10 points, name this substance that, like wax, is produced by bees.

ANSWER: honey

Result: 162 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: 9 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57648

Question: One of these animals got his head stuck inside of a skull after looking inside it to watch some dancing mice. That animal of this type told some ducks to close their eyes while he sang, allowing him to kill them with a club. One of these animals dropped dead after saying the cursed number "five" and once caught a python by tying him to a tree branch. One of these animals named "Grandmother" is the subject of Navajo myths, and the (*) Lakota trickster god Iktomi takes the form of this animal. The Asante Twi word for this animal names a creature who captures some hornets and a leopard and brings them to the sky god Nyame in order to receive all the world's stories. For 10 points, name this animal, the form taken by West African god Anansi.

ANSWER: spiders

Result: 163 | STIMPY | 2015 | Round: Tiebreakers | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57764

Question: This man was convinced to betray his city according to accounts attributed to Dictys Cretensis and Dares Phrygius. This person's charioteer Pandarus was speared in the face by Diomedes, who then threw a large rock at this man's hip. He may have disappeared in the river Numicus while fighting Mezentius, who is slain along with his son Lausus by this man in another account. This hero is told by (*) harpies that he will not be safe until his men are forced to eat their tables. Io convinces a crowd of women to burn this man's ships while he is holding some funeral games. The sight of a stolen belt prompts this future husband of Lavinia to slay his foe Turnus. For 10 points, name this son of Venus and Anchises, a Trojan prince who visits Dido's Carthage before journeying to Italy in an epic by Virgil.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 164 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 1 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 59527

Question: An epic simile characterizes this man as a snake fattened on poison grasses that sloughs off its skin and reappears, young again, after the winter. This man's bones are littered through Ambracia after Orestes murders him in a beef over Menelaus' daughter Hermione. This son of Deidamia also took Andromache as a concubine after the Trojan War. In Sophocles' Philoctetes, this hero debates Odysseus on whether to retrieve Philoctetes by force or guile. This man beheads (*) Polites in front of the boy's father Priam, whom he guts in front of an altar in the Aeneid, also taking care to launch Astyanax off of the city walls. Troy could not be taken until this man arrived from Skyros, where he was conceived while his father was disguised as a girl. For 10 points, name this psychotic son of Achilles.

ANSWER: Neoptolemus

Result: 165 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 10 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 59789

Question: During this event, the king of the Gods sends down a Fury in the form of a screeching bird to scare away a water nymph whose virginity he took. One participant in this event picks up a giant boulder set down as a boundary stone and tries to throw it, but his knees collapse. The loser of this event had hastily left his father's sword at home and taken the more fragile sword of his charioteer Metiscus, whose shape is taken by that loser's sister, (*) Juturna. In the aftermath of this event, Juno secures a promise from Jupiter to let the Latins keep their ancestral names. At the end of this fight, the victor almost pardons his victim before spotting the slain Pallas' belt. For 10 points, name this climactic duel of an epic by Vergil, in which a Trojan prince kills the king of the Rutulians.

ANSWER: Aeneas' fight with Turnus [or equivalents]

Result: 166 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 11 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 59875

Question: This character rescues the priest Dares' son Idaios from Diomedes because Dares already lost his son Phegeus. This character ends a quarrel among the gods at the end of Book I of the Iliad when all the gods cease their fighting to laugh at him. Homer unusually claims that this god's spouse was the grace Aglaea, or Charis. In the Odyssey, Demodocus tells the story of a trick played by this god to (*) entrap two other gods in the middle of sex. A gift from this god juxtaposes the images of a city at peace and a city under siege. His most epic moment in Homer comes when he strangles the river Scamander to rescue Achilles. Because the nymph Thetis raised him on Lemnos, he gifts her son Achilles a new set of armor. For 10 points, name this deformed smith for the Olympian gods.

ANSWER: Hephaestus

Result: 167 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 12 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 60066

Question: In one story from this country, two lovers turn into butterflies after one jumps into the other's grave. In another folktale from this country, a woman born out of a calabash destroys the stone edifice holding her husband's bones by weeping. In a more famous story from this country, a man kills his ox to use its hide to fly into the sky and become the star Altair. In that story from this country, a flock of (*) magpies form a bridge on the seventh day of the seventh month every year to reunite the Cowherd and the Weaver Girl. In the mythology of this country, ten suns filled the sky before nine were shot by the archer Yi. For 10 points, name this country with mythical heroes include the engineer Yu the Great and the monkey king Sun Wukong.

ANSWER: China

Result: 168 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 13 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 60112

Question: This character, who curses and later ties up the goatherd Melanthius, is the only character apostrophized by the narrator of the poem in which he appears. This man was originally a prince from the island of Syria, before his seduced Phoenician nurse sold him to pirates. A guest at this man's house tests him by claiming to be a Cretan son of Castor, which this man disbelieves, and offering to leave in the morning, which this man forbids. This character explains that an animal lying on a (*) manure heap is the dog Argos, who dies after seeing the beggar this man is hosting. This character weeps while presenting his master's bow to the suitors, but happily assists his master in killing them. For 10 points, name this Ithacan swineherd who stays loyal to Odysseus in the Odyssey.

ANSWER: Eumaeus

Result: 169 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 14 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 60172

Question: Visions this god sent to Aelius Aristides are detailed in Aristides' Sacred Discourses, an important description of pagan religiosity. After predicting the future of this god, Chiron's daughter Ocyrhoe metamorphosed into a horse. Ovid relates that this god's cult arrived at Rome when he sailed to an island in the Tiber as a snake. In Greece, devotees worshiped this father of Machaon by (*) "incubating" in his shrines to receive dreams, especially at Epidaurus. This man's name comes from the word for "to cut open," because he was cut out of his mother's womb on her funeral pyre; that mother was Coronis. Zeus' Cyclopes were killed for forging the thunderbolt that slew this man, who had displayed hubris by raising the dead. For 10 points, name this son of Apollo, the Greek god of medicine.

ANSWER: Asclepius

Result: 170 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 15 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 60193

Question: This man marries a daughter of the giant Hrimnir who transformed into a crow to help with his conception. Nine of this man's sons are eaten by a woman who shapeshifts into a wolf, before his tenth son uses honey to slay it. This man stays for six years in his mother's womb, where he was conceived with the help of an apple sent by Odin and Frigg. This son of (*) Rerir builds a giant hall whose center contained the tree Barnstokk, where a mysterious one-eyed visitor places the sword Gram. This man marries his daughter off to the Geatish king Siggeir, who murders him and all his sons except Sigmund. For 10 points, name this character from Norse myth, the patriarch of the clan of Sigurd and Sigmund.

ANSWER: Volsung

Result: 171 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 2 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 59554

Question: This god fathered a lioness-headed demon who killed unborn children by touching their mother's stomach seven times. The easily-flattered Tammuz and Gishzida guard the palace of this god, whose offer of the food of immortality is refused by the fisherman Adapa. In a Hittite myth that inspired the Greek story of Cronus, this god's semen creates Teshub when he is (*) castrated by his monstrous son Kumarbi. In the Epic of Gilgamesh, Ishtar's threats to raise the dead intimidate this god into allowing her use of the bull Gugalanna. This consort of Ki is descended from Apsu and Tiamat, has his holiest city at Uruk, and gives up his supremacy to Marduk. For 10 points, name this Mesopotamian god of the heavens, part of a triad with Enlil and Ea.

ANSWER: Anu

Result: 172 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 3 | Question: 15 | Mythology | AmericanID: 59580

Question: According to Plato and Pausanias, this was the only region of Greece that practiced human sacrifice, specifically at a temple of Zeus in the mountains. This region uniquely worshiped Demeter's daughter Despoina, whose mysteries were at Lycosura. This region's name derives from a son of Zeus and Callisto hidden here when Hera made Callisto a bear. A king of this region murdered his son Nyctimus and became the first (*) werewolf. In the Metamorphoses, Zeus decides to flood the world because this region's king, Lycaon, serves him human flesh. Its most famous resident made a set of pipes out of the transformed nymph Syrinx. For 10 points, name this mountainous region of the Peloponnese home to Pan, a creepily violent place usually depicted as a pastoral utopia.

ANSWER: Arcadia

Result: 173 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 4 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 59588

Question: Autolycus instructed Heracles in this activity, which Cyrene was performing when Apollo abducted her to North Africa. In the Iliad, Achilles calls off a competition between Ajax and Odysseus in this activity and gives them both identical prizes. The king of Eleusis, Cercyon, won notoriety in this activity. A man famous for skill in this activity carried a (*) calf on his shoulders every day and built strength as it grew. A demigod built a temple to Poseidon with the skulls of victims he defeated at this activity, in which he was invincible as long as he touched the ground. To discover how to return home to Sparta, Menelaus had to overcome Proteus in this activity. For 10 points, name this activity in which Heracles killed Antaeus by grappling him in a bearhug.

ANSWER: wrestling [or wrestling a lion until "in this activity" is read]

Result: 174 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 5 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 59617

Question: This myth system explains that the war god Tu invented agriculture by uprooting the sweet potato and fernroot gods by their hair. According to this myth system, the forest god moulded red clay into the first woman, who fled to become goddess of the underworld after learning that her husband was her father; that death goddess has obsidian teeth lining her (*) vagina, which snaps a hero crawling through her body in half. In this culture's creation myth, the children of the Earth and the Sky conspire to push their parents apart with their feet to allow light into the world. For 10 points, name this myth system whose creation myth details the separation of Papa and Rangi, whose grandchild was the famous trickster god, Maui.

ANSWER: Polynesian mythology [or: Maori mythology, Hawaiian mythology]

Result: 175 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 5 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 59637

Question: This myth system explains that the war god Tu invented agriculture by uprooting the sweet potato and fernroot gods by their hair. According to this myth system, the forest god moulded red clay into the first woman, who fled to become goddess of the underworld after learning that her husband was her father; that death goddess has obsidian teeth lining her (*) vagina, which snaps a hero crawling through her body in half. In this culture's creation myth, the children of the Earth and the Sky conspire to push their parents apart with their feet to allow light into the world. For 10 points, name this myth system whose creation myth details the separation of Papa and Rangi, whose grandchild was the famous trickster god, Maui.

ANSWER: Polynesian mythology [or: Maori mythology, Hawaiian mythology]

Result: 176 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 6 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 59715

Question: In a Vedic myth, Shiva fits Daksha with this animal's head after cutting off his human head for provoking Sati's suicide. The Flamen Dialis was forbidden to touch dogs or these animals because they were considered polluted in Roman religion. An indigenous Italian god with this animal's features was the father of King Latinus in the Aeneid. Priests ran around lashing women with whips made from (*) this animal's skins during the Lupercalia, in which priests leaped around naked except for girdles made from them. In Norse mythology, Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjostr are two of these animals that Thor cleaves, cooks, and reassembles in the morning to pull his chariot. For 10 points, name this animal whose head pokes out of the back of the Chimera, and whose horns decorate the heads of fauns.

ANSWER: goats

Result: 177 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 7 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 59722

Question: In the kabuki play Yoshitsune Senbonzakura, Minamoto no Yoshitsune relinquishes a magic drum to one of these animals on a quest to honor its parents. Another of these beings invents the paolao torture method, involving a slowly-heating metal bar, as the consort to King Zhou of Shang in The Investiture of the Gods. The Korean kumiho and the Chinese huli jing are examples of these creatures, which store power in white-gold "star balls" that hover around their faces. A tunnel of ten thousand (*) torii gates snakes up a mountain to a shrine for a god of these animals, an androgynous kami of rice. In East Asian myth systems, demonic spirits of these animals possess human women. For 10 points, name this animal whose form is taken by the kitsune demons and the kami Inari.

ANSWER: foxes [or specific examples, such as kitsune]

Result: 178 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 8 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 59748

Question: According to Apollodorus, this man was the father of Argus, Phrontis, Cytissorus and Mela, four shipwreck survivors rescued by Jason. Phony messengers from an oracle announced that this man's death could end a drought that actually started when women in his city planted burnt seeds. This man married the princess Chalciope in a city he reached with help from his mother, a cloud shaped by Zeus to look like Hera. Because he was the child of the nymph (*) Nephele, this son of Athamas galled his stepmother Ino, who conspired to have him sacrificed. Although this man escaped to Colchis, his sister plunged into the sea off the back of the ram that rescued them. For 10 points, name this brother of Helle who gave King Aeetes the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Phrixus

Result: 179 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: 9 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 59762

Question: In Celtic myth, this type of event, signaled by a bell tolling, turns the Children of Lir from swans into humans. This kind of event happens at the halfway point of Njal's Saga as a consequence of Thangbrand traipsing around Iceland stabbing people. This type of event is allegorically depicted in the final runo of an epic poem, in which an old man sails away on a copper boat after being accused by a (*) baby he sentenced to death. This kind of event, which coincides with Oisin's return from Tir na Nog, is treated allegorically in Marjatta cycle that ends the Kalevala. In Ireland, this type of event is enacted by a British boy enslaved by pirates who uses the shamrock to illustrate his ideas. For 10 points, identify this type of mass cultural shift in which a people abandons its pagan gods to worship Jesus.

ANSWER: Christianization [or: conversion to Christianity, adoption of Christianity, adoption of Catholicism, obvious equivalents; prompt on: "conversion to a new religion", "end of paganism"]

Result: 180 | VCU Open | 2015 | Round: Tiebreakers | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 60198

Question: In an early account, this being appears in the dreams of a king sleeping under an apple tree and is explained by the queen's pious mother as signifying future attacks on the church. One story relates that its mother sleeps with a devil and then accuses her own brother of rape, prompting that brother to curse this being. This being has the feet of a hart, the haunches of a lion, the body of a leopard, and the head and neck of a snake. Its most famous attribute, which is sometimes attributed to its unborn children, is the sound of (*) thirty hounds barking that emerges from its belly. In one story, the Saracen Sir Palamedes is only able to slay this being after he converts to Christianity. For 10 points, name this creature which is also pursued by Sir Percival and his father King Pellinore and whose name derives from their task.

ANSWER: Questing Beast [or Beast Glatisant]

Result: 181 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Berkeley A | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42629

Question: In the mythology of this country, an apprentice burns a man's body after six and a half days, which forces that man to take up the body of a dead beggar and use an iron crutch. The first man in this country's mythology was a primitive horned giant who was born from an egg and separated the earth and sky. According to this country's mythology, the havoc that ten suns wreaked on the earth forced an archer to shoot nine of them down, and that archer's wife floated to the moon after she drank the elixir of immortality. For 10 points, name this country whose mythology includes stories about the Eight Immortals and the Three Pure Ones, one of whom is the Jade Emperor.

ANSWER: China [or Chinese mythology; or Zhonghua; or Zhongguo]

Result: 182 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: CalTech A + Sheffield + Arcadia A | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 42694

Question: Sobek used a fish trap to retrieve some of these body parts belonging to Horus after Isis threw them into a river. After a failed assassination attempt on Lars Porsena, Gaius Mucius burned one of these body parts to prove his dedication. In Irish mythology, Nuada Airgetlam is unfit to be king of the Tuatha De Danaan because he lacks one of these body parts. After the Norse gods bound Fenrir with Gleipnir, Fenrir bit off one of these body parts belonging to the war god Tyr. In Greek myth, the brothers of the Cyclopes, the Hecatonchires, had one hundred of these body parts. For 10 points, name these appendages on which Thor wore Jarngreipr, a set of gloves.

ANSWER: hands [accept left hand or right hand; prompt on "fingers"]

Result: 183 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Colonel By A + Ottawa A | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 43033

Question: Leaves from the bael tree are offered to this deity on a holiday that commemorates his performing of the tandava nritya. A version of this god called Bhikshatana is a beggar who traveled carrying a skull in repentance for cutting off the fifth head of Brahma. This god is surrounded by a ring of flames in statues depicting him as "the lord of dance," Nataraja. This god is often worshipped in the symbolic form of the lingam. This god drank a poison created by the churning of the ocean of milk, but only his throat turned blue because he was preventatively strangled by his wife Parvati. For 10 points, name this deity who is the "destroyer" aspect of the Hindu Trimurti.

ANSWER: Shiva [or Mahadeva; accept Nataraja until read]

Result: 184 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Colonel By A + Ottawa A | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 43039

Question: It's not Aeetes, but Jason married the daughter of a king who shares his name with this man, and who died with his daughter Glauke after she received a cursed dress. This man's son committed suicide by throwing himself off the city walls because it was prophesied that the death of Menoeceus would save the city. This man was the brother of Jocasta, and his wife Eurydice committed suicide after the death of his son Haemon. One of his decrees was broken by a daughter of Oedipus, who buried her brother Polyneices after he was killed by Eteocles . For 10 points, name this king of Thebes who sentenced Antigone to death.

ANSWER: Creon

Result: 185 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Columbia A + Vassar A | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 43307

Question: In Book XIII of the Iliad, an overconfident Hector calls this man an "inarticulate ox." This man brings up the example of a man accepting blood money in his attempt to persuade Achilles to rejoin the Trojan War, which is delivered after Odysseus' and Phoenix's appeals. This man and Hector engaged in a duel that resulted in an exchange of a purple sash for a sword, with which this man committed suicide after he was denied the armor of Achilles. This man often partnered with his half-brother Teucer, who darted out of this man's protection to shoot arrows. For 10 points, name this huge son of Telamon who owned a shield made of seven oxhide layers.

ANSWER: Ajax the Greater [accept Telamonian Ajax until "Telamon" and prompt on it after; accept Aias in place of "Ajax"; prompt on "Ajax" or "Aias"]

Result: 186 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: DCC C + UGA + Brown A | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 43477

Question: In Egyptian mythology, one of these objects took the forms of the Mandjet and the Mesektet. In Norse mythology, the giantess Hyrrokkin arrived to push one of these objects, on which Nanna committed suicide. The Gylfaginning advises its readers to clip the toe- and fingernails of the dead to prevent the completion of the largest of these objects, which is named Naglfar, and also mentions the best of them, Frey's Skidbladnir. Similarly to the way a dove lost parts of its tail feathers, one of these objects was partially damaged as it passed through the Clashing Rocks on its way to Colchis and the Golden Fleece. For 10 points, identify these objects exemplified by the Argo, on which Jason sailed.

ANSWER: ships [or boats; or solar barges; or solar barques]

Result: 187 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Editors | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 43509

Question: This woman's first husband was a son of Broteas named Tantalus, who ruled Lydia and was killed by her second husband. This woman's daughter had to be sacrificed to Artemis before the Greek ships could leave Aulis for Troy. This woman trapped her husband in a net while he was bathing, and killed both her husband and his concubine Cassandra to avenge the murder of Iphigenia. She was the mortal sister of Castor and Pollux, who were born from Leda's eggs. Athena cast the deciding vote of acquittal in a trial concerning the murder of this woman, who was killed along with her lover Aegisthus. For 10 points, name this wife of Agamemnon, who was killed by her son Orestes.

ANSWER: Clytemnestra

Result: 188 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: LASA A + Toronto A + Virginia A | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 43574

Question: This god has a palace with a roof supported by golden pillars; in that palace of this god, the meals are served by invisible servants. In the Aeneid, this god disguises himself as Aeneas's son Iulus. In one story, a woman is convinced by her sisters that this god is actually a serpent that will eat her and her child by this god. That woman accidentally burns this god by spilling some lamp oil in her attempt to see this god's face. This god married a woman who retrieved a box containing some of Proserpina's beauty from the underworld. For 10 points, name this husband of Psyche and son of Venus who is the Roman god of love.

ANSWER: Cupid [or Eros until "Aeneid"]

Result: 189 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Lawrence A | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 43699

Question: The wind aspect of this god fell in love with the goddess of the maguey plant. This god immolated himself after being tricked into drunkenly breaking his celibacy with a priestess. This god's dog-headed, skeleton-bodied twin brother assisted him when he created the humans of the fifth world cycle by gathering the bones of the dead from Mictlan and sprinkling them with his own blood. This rival of Tezcatlipoca sailed East on a raft made of serpents and was expected to return in a One Reed year, which allegedly caused an emperor to mistake the conquistador Hernán Cortés for this god. For 10 points, name this feathered serpent god worshipped in Aztec mythology.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl [prompt on "Ehecatl" until "exile," do not accept afterwards]

Result: 190 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: MIT B + Davis + Hinsdale | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 43727

Question: After getting tired of performing this action manually, the Chinese goddess Nuwa flicked a length of rope instead. In the Popul Vuh, Tepeu and Gucumatz's first attempts at performing this action are washed away by rain, and they eventually succeed using cornmeal dough. Odin and his brothers Ve and Vili used two trees when doing this action, which resulted the formation of Ask and Embla. In Ovid's Metamorphoses, Deucalion and Pyrrha unknowingly do this by throwing stones behind their backs. Because Epimetheus used up all the good traits, Prometheus gave the products of this action fire. For 10 points, name this action that, in the Bible, produced Adam and Eve.

ANSWER: creating human beings [accept equivalent answers]

Result: 191 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: MIT B + Davis + Hinsdale | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 43736

Question: Tiresias prophesied that this man would go so far inland that the people would not recognize an oar he was carrying. In Book X of the Iliad, this man joins Diomedes in a night-time spying mission that results in the death of Dolon and the Thracian king Rhesus. His attempt to avoid fulfilling the Oath of Tyndareus was thwarted by Palamedes, who threw his son onto the ground as this man ploughed a field with salt. He won the contest for the armor of Achilles, after which Ajax the Greater committed suicide. This man fooled the cyclops Polyphemus by calling himself "nobody." For 10 points, name this king of Ithaca who eventually reunites with his wife Penelope.

ANSWER: Odysseus [or Ulysses until "Iliad"]

Result: 192 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Ohio State Distance + Louisville A + Tulane A + Clemson A | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 43743

Question: After meeting a son of this god and Aphrodite, the nymph Salmacis prayed that the two of them would never part. At the end of the Iliad, this god protects Priam as he attempts to retrieve the body of Hector. Zeus hid this god's mother in a cave in Cyllene. Soon after his birth, this son of Maia stole the cattle of Apollo. This god's granddaughter Anticleia was seduced by Sisyphus, making Odysseus a descendant of this god, who gave his great-grandson moly as protection against Circe. The Rod of Asclepius is often mistaken for this god's symbol, which is the caduceus. For 10 points, name this Greek messenger god who wore winged sandals.

ANSWER: Hermes [accept Mercury until "Iliad"]

Result: 193 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Ohio State Distance + Louisville A + Tulane A + Clemson A | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 43754

Question: One figure associated with this kind of place is the bodhisattva Ksitigarbha ["siti-garba"], who is often depicted carrying a wish-fulfilling jewel and presiding over six roads as the "lord of the six ways". In Buddhism, this region is divided into sixteen "Narakas". In Sumerian belief, the Anunnaki are a group of judges that reside in this type of region, which is called Irkalla and is ruled by Ereshkigal and her husband Nergal. Psychopomps are deities that serve as guides to these locations. In Greek myth, eating half of a pomegranate forced Persephone to live in this place for part of each year as the wife of Hades. For 10 points, identify this type of location that one might go to in the afterlife.

ANSWER: the underworld [or hell; or Naraka until it is read; or Irkalla until it is read; or Hades until it is read; prompt on "afterlife" until it is read]

Result: 194 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Rockford Auburn A + Cal Poly SLO | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 43832

Question: Because this man sheltered Diomedes' grandfather Oeneus, Diomedes offers to trade armors with this man's grandson Glaucus in the Iliad. This man was forced to fight the Solymi and the Amazons after he was sent to the court of Iobates, whose daughter Stheneboea falsely accused this man of raping her. This man fell into some thorny bushes after Zeus sent a gadfly to stop his final act of hubris. After spending a night in the temple of Athena, he found a golden bridle, and used it to tame an animal on which he killed a monster that was part lion, part goat, and part snake. For 10 points, name this rider of Pegasus who killed the Chimera.

ANSWER: Bellerophon [or Bellerophontes]

Result: 195 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Southmapton + TAMU C + Dorman A | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 43860

Question: One of these entities called Van was formed after the gods bound Fenrir with Gleipnir. During his journey to Hel, Hermod passed by one of these entities after meeting the guardian Modgud, who stands near one of them called Gjoll. In Hinduism, one of these entities originates from Shiva's matted hair. In the Iliad, a god of one of these entities is angered by the growing pile of Trojan warriors killed by Achilles but is prevented from killing him by Hephaestus' fire. Heracles won the hand of Deianeira after he defeated a god of these entities named Asopus. For 10 points, name these bodies of water, a Greek example of which was the Styx.

ANSWER: rivers [or potamoi]

Result: 196 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: VCU A + Central Connecticut + Virginia C | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 44037

Question: Two men in the mythology of these people were given a message relayed through a hawk, which had eaten a snake, which had eaten a toad, which had eaten a louse. According to a text central to these peoples' beliefs, a god of earthquakes and a god of mountains were the children of an impostor who pretended to be the Sun and Moon and was named Vucub Caquix, or Seven Macaw. In this myth system, obstacles like the House of Razors and House of Bats are no match for the Hero Twins, who ultimately outwit the Lords of this myth system's underworld, Xibalba. The Popol Vuh is a compendium of the mythology of, for 10 points, what Mesoamerican civilization?

ANSWER: Mayans [or K'iche Mayan civilization; or Mayan mythology]

Result: 197 | ACF Fall | 2014 | Round: Waterloo + Darthmouth | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 44050

Question: This substance names an object made from the son of Poseidon and Theophane, who rescued the children of Athamas and Nephele. According to the Prose Edda, the columns of Forseti's palace Glitnir are made of this substance. After Thiazi kidnapped Idunn, the Aesir could no longer restore their youth with objects made from this substance. Hreidmar demanded the Aesir to cover Otr's ["Otter's"] body with this substance after his death. A man who hospitably entertained Silenus accidentally turned his son into this substance, after which he was told to bathe in the river Pactolus by Dionysus. For 10 points, name this substance into which Midas could transform objects with his touch.

ANSWER: gold

Result: 198 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Alabama, Columbia A, and Columbia B | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 45909

Question: This boy's mother settled a dispute arising from a contest between two of his uncles to see who could shoot an arrow through a gold ring, by off€ering to tie the ring around this kid's neck; that expert political maneuver got Isander and Hippolochus to resign their claims to the kingdom to this man. The North Wind revived him from unconsciousness brought about by a thigh wound he sustained while killing Tlepolemus. This man's corpse was whisked away by Hypnos and Thanatos aˆer being rescued by Apollo. This man took Hector to task for eff€usively praising his relatives, who "cowered like hounds before a lion." This man later helped Hector out by leading a diversionary attack on the Greek battlements with Asteropaios and his cousin Glaucus. Zeus sent a shower of blood as an omen of the death of this man, his son, aˆer conceding to Hera that it would be imprudent to save his life in a battle against Achilles's companion For 10 points, name this son of Laodamia, the King of Lycia, who gets killed by Patroclus in the Iliad.

ANSWER: Sarpedon

Result: 199 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Alberta, Washington, and Chicago B | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 45443

Question: One of these beings liked touching people at random, crippling them for life, inspiring his hilarious epithet "Stroke Lad." Rabid dogs and mentally unstable people gathered at a "chair" sacred to another of these beings. A seven foot tall subset of these beings, known as the Gentry, oˆen kidnap interesting people and convert them into more Gentry. They are subdivided into those who walk on the ground aˆer sunset, those who travel through air, and those who guard lakes. Euphemisms such as "The Little People" and "The Good Neighbors" were used as a way for people to avoid addressing these beings directly. They were ruled by regional queens such as Aoibhinn and Aynia, who owed their allegiance to the high queen Onagh and her husband Finvarra. Aˆer being crushed by the Milesians, the Tuatha de Danaan ventured into the Otherworld, transformed into these beings, and hid beneath mounds; hence these beings, who can turn invisible, are called "the people of the mounds." For 10 points, name these beautiful, underground-dwelling spirits from Celtic myth, which includes those who wail as a premonition of death, the bean (BAN) type.

ANSWER: sidhe (pronounced SHEEs) [or aos sidhe; or aes sidhe; or sith; prompt on "spirits" until mentioned; prompt on "fairies"; prompt on "feys"; acceptGentryuntil mentioned; accept things indicatingmoundpeople ormound-dwellers until "mounds" are mentioned; reverse prompt on "banshees"; accept The Little People and The Good Neighbors and The Fair Folk and The Folk from superstitious Celts until either they are mentioned by name, or the word "directly" is read; prompt on "Tuatha de Danaan" until mentioned]

Result: 200 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Chicago A | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 31025

Question: A god once assisted this man by tossing snow, ice, and iron at a re-breathing horse. This man's singing was so bad that a crane ‚ed north and woke up everyone in its path. In one story, he and his companion Tiera set sail on a quest of revenge, but were foiled when their foe froze the sea. Several women allowed this man to stay on the Island of Refuge, but he opted to leave aˆer their husbands returned from war. He once showed up late to a party, and was served a beer filled with snakes. In his first appearance, he posed as a herdsman to get closer to one of the women of Saari, then abducted and married her at an opportune time, though he soon divorced her for breaking a promise not to dance with men. He himself broke a vow by attacking a witch who had taken the form of an eagle. Aˆer a blind herdsman summoned a snake to kill and maim this man, his mother used a copper rake to gather the pieces of his body and added a drop of honey to revive him. That episode happened just aˆer this man tried to win the hand of Louhi's daughter by taking aim at the swan of Tuonela. For 10 points, name this companion of Vainamoinen, a hero from the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Lemminkainen [or Lemminki]

Result: 201 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Dartmouth | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 30998

Question: In Incan mythology, this group was represented by a single deity, Collca, who was regarded as the keeper of the seeds. One member of this group sank into the ground below a spot marked by a pine tree watered by his mother's tears in Cherokee mythology. To woo Agni, Svaha disguised herself as six members of this group. The Flamen Volcanis sacrificed a pregnant sow to one member of this group, the mother of the twin Lares, at the beginning of the month named for her. In Greek myth, that member of this group avoided the gods by hiding in Mount Cyllene, where all of these people were born, but Zeus tracked her down and begot Hermes upon her. All of them were transformed into doves when they were chased by a man who himself was chased and killed by a scorpion. In an alternate myth, these women killed themselves upon hearing of the transformation of their siblings, the Hyades. For 10 points, name these daughters of Atlas, doomed to be pursued by Orion forever in the night sky as the constellation of Seven Sisters.

ANSWER: Pleiades [accept Seven Sisters before mentioned, though that's only right for the Greco-Roman clues; accept Krittka]

Result: 202 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Editors 1 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 49691

Question: This god was oˆen honored in a ceremony in which men hung captives over bronze cauldrons, priestesses slit their throats, and the contents of the cauldrons were tossed into lakes. An antidote charm mentions how this god used nine "glory-twigs" to smite a serpent into nine parts. This god's wife once tricked him by turning their bed 180 degrees, so that he faced a group of women with hair combed over their faces, thereby taking advantage of his promise to grant victory to the first people he saw when he awoke, which happened to be those "longbeards." This ancestor of Hengist and Horsa lives in a namesake weather telling mountain, which is the start and end point of a ceremony in which he leads a team of ghosts in pursuit of animals or women. Tacitus identified Mercury with this god, since they both wore winged helmets and served as psychopomps. This god, who came to prominence at the expense of Tyr, names the third day of the week. For 10 points, name this Germanic equivalent of the head of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Wotan [or Woden; or Wotanaz; accept Odin, though none of the clues are about the Norse Odin, but he's basically the same god]

Result: 203 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Editors 2 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 52271

Question: This woman manages to protect her sons by having them switch their mourning clothes with white robes, resulting in soldiers slaughtering her rival Themisto's twins instead of hers. This woman gives a stranded Odysseus an enchanted veil to protect him from harm and instructs him to toss the garment as far as he can into the sea aˆer reaching land. Because of this woman's short stint as the caretaker of her nephew Dionysus, Hera jealously in‚flicts her husband with madness, causing her to escape and plunge into the sea with her son Melicertes, aˆer which she is reborn as the goddess Leucothea. This sister of Semele sets one plan in motion by rendering fallow the seed-corn fields of Boeotia, then bribing the local farmers to lie that the Oracle's solution to avert famine requires the sacrifice of a child. This plan is thwarted when Nephele, the first wife of this woman's husband Athamas, sends a golden ram to rescue her children. For 10 points, name this queen of Thebes, the wicked stepmother of Phrixus and Helle.

ANSWER: Ino [or Leucothea before mentioned]

Result: 204 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Editors 3 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 52820

Question: Since this deity was said to have rewarded any o€fferings, coins were oˆen tossed into wells in a possible precursor of the similar modern custom. This deity angrily gave a cured leper his leprosy back because he disobeyed the order to bathe with another man also suff€ering from leprosy. This deity's birth at sunrise coincided with a pillar of ‚flame that shot up to the heavens. This goddess, whose name means "exalted one," invented both whistling and a poetic combination of weeping and singing occasioned by her lament for her deceased son, known as keening. Julius Caesar compared the role of this goddess to that of Minerva in his Commentaries on the Gallic Wars. This goddess was celebrated in a festival that marked when ewes first began to produce milk, signaling the start of spring, known as Imbolc. This daughter of the Dagda was syncretized with a slave from Kildare who was baptized by Patrick. For 10 points, name this pagan goddess of wisdom, poetry, and the hearth who later became a female patron saint of Ireland.

ANSWER: Brigid [or Brigit; accept Saint Brigit of Kildare, even though all of the clues are about the pagan goddess]

Result: 205 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Editors 4 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 52838

Question: A god and goddess once entered this city in triumph aˆer the god shook the goddess awake to save her from being killed by a serpent. The Book of Isaiah punned on the Hebrew name for this city by calling it ir haheres, or the city of destruction, an idea that Jeremiah took a step further by prophesying its specific ransacking by Nebuchadnezzar. A stone located in this city was thought to represent the mound that coalesced along with the lotus from the primordial waters. The bull Mnevis, a symbol of this city, was oˆen depicted with a disc in between its horns. According to myths from this city, the world was created when its progenitor spat or masturbated. That god was from the first generation in this city's Great Pesedjet, a grouping of nine deities better known as the Ennead. A single obelisk is all that remains of this city, to which the reborn phoenix brought the ashes of the old phoenix. For 10 points, name this Egyptian cult center of Atum and Ra, which had a Greek name meaning "city of the sun."

ANSWER: Heliopolis [or On; or 'ir hasemes before 'ir haheres is mentioned; or 'ir haheres before mentioned]

Result: 206 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Editors 5 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 52856

Question: In one version of this event, it unfolds due to an overheard conversation between two maidens, one of whom claims that women are capable of bearing burdens. One participant in this event says that a ship's captain has more brains than a common rower has brawns. The other participant in it says that he owns an object that is full of holes and mentions that his opponent works under the cover of night and frequently needs a sidekick. Book 13 of the Metamorphosis opens with this event. In the immediate aftˆermath of this event, one of its participants shouts "This is mine at least!" and is driven by Athena to slaughter a fl‚ock of sheep that he imagines to be his enemies. Aˆfter this event, Eurysaces receives the shield of his father, whose name is emblazoned on the petals of a purple fl‚ower that grows from his bloodstain aftˆer he escapes his humiliation from this event by impaling himself on his sword. For 10 points, name this post-Trojan war event in which Odysseus and Ajax compete to receive the arms of a deceased comrade.

ANSWER: the contest for Achilles's armor between Odysseus and Ajax [or Odysseus versus Ajax before they are mentioned; or the judgment of arms; or the contest for armor; accept synonyms of all those things; also accept things like Odysseus winning the armor of Achilles and Ajax not getting the armor of Achilles]

Result: 207 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Editors 5 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 52866

Question: This god once reunited a man with his four newly-revived sons aˆfter praying to the ocean to part its waters for him. An evil king was so haunted by the prophecy that this god would one day kill him, that he dreamt of seeing his own headless body in a mirror. This god tossed one of his enemies into a wrestling ring and murdered him there, and dealt with one of that demon's lieutenants by choking him so hard that a hole popped out of his skull to let the air out. He safeguarded the dignity of 16,100 captive women by marrying all of them. This god once asked people to o€er a sacrifice to a hill instead of to their usual deity, and dealt with the consequences of that blasphemy by liftˆing the hill with one finger to act as an umbrella to brave the storm sent in retribution. Unlike his swarthier elder brother, who was transferred to the womb of Rohini to be born, this killer of Kamsa was the eighth child of Devaki. Among his cowgirl groupies, known as the gopis, was his eventual consort, Radha. For 10 points, name this avatar of Vishnu who served as Arjuna's wise charioteer, who is venerated by a Hindu movement whose members chant "Hare." (hah-RAY)

ANSWER: Krishna [prompt on Vishnu]

Result: 208 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Editors 6 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 52879

Question: A city in this region was founded by a group of people who came upon an olive tree with a serpent at its base and an eagle in its branches, and then sacrificed the eagle to Poseidon and Zeus. A queen instructed her attendants to throw several bags full of sand into the sea here. One king in this region, the twin brother of Belus, sent either Thasus and Phineus along with Cilix to hunt down his daughter aˆfter she was abducted by Zeus, who ordered Hermes to drive that king's cattle down to the seashore. Heracles was identified with a major god from this region, Melqart. A prince born in this region was told by the Delphic oracle to follow a cow and to settle wherever the cow lay down. A priest from this region was murdered because he concealed vast quantities of treasure underground, and because he had been sleeping with the wife of King Pygmalion. Aˆfter Sychaeus was killed in this region, his lover sailed west with her followers and established a new home in North Africa. For 10 points, name this region, the original home of Dido, the queen of Tyre.

ANSWER: Phoenicia [accept Tyre before mentioned; accept Sidon]

Result: 209 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Editors 7 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 47409

Question: These animals pulled the chariot of a toothless Vedic god whose considerate followers o€ffered him gruel and other soˆ foods. During an assembly in a section of the Campus Martius named for these animals, a sudden storm followed by a solar eclipse concealed Romulus's ascension into godhood. Blodeuwedd once tricked Llew into revealing that he could only be killed while stepping on a cauldron with one foot and on this animal with another. Herodotus wrote that women oˆen had sex with these animals at Mendes in Egypt, where they were greatly revered; centuries later, Eliphas Levi illustrated that animal "of Mendes," and it became identified with the occult deity Baphomet. Loki once tied one end of a thong to one of these animals and the other end to his scrotum in order to make Skadi laugh. Two of these animals named "teeth-grinder" and "teeth-barer" belonged to Thor. In Greek mythology, the chimera had the head of one of these animals. Another of these animals, or a nymph who tended them, suckled the infant Zeus on Mount Ida. For 10 points, name these animals that included Amalthea, whose broken horn became the cornucopia.

ANSWER: goats [or Capra aegagrus hircus]

Result: 210 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Editors 8 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 52890

Question: This deity fathered seven demons who periodically emerged from the underworld to retrieve the blood, liver, and other organs of sacrificed animals. This god once summoned a fisherman who had broken the wings of the wind god, and was so impressed by that man's sincerity that he off€ered him the food and drink of immortality, which were both refused. This god controlled a set of powerful shooting stars known as kishrus. Atrahasis was home to the throne of this god, which was guarded by Ningishzida. This god's escape was once cut o€ when his son bit o€ his genitals, causing that son to become pregnant with three gods; he then teamed up with one of his grandsons, Teshub, to defeat that son, Kumarbi. Upset by Gilgamesh's rejection, Ishtar once convinced this god to send a bull to wreak havoc on Earth. Oˆften depicted with a royal tiara, this god split patronage of Uruk with Inanna and ruled the heavens. For 10 points, name this Sumerian god who formed a triad with Ea and Enki.

ANSWER: Anu

Result: 211 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 52924

Question: Three of these beings partook in an inauspicious footrace, aˆfter which one was gored by a bull and another was turned into an ivy plant aˆfter climbing a tree. A god once attached cymbals to his ship during a long voyage for the sole purpose of waking these beings up. One of these beings describes Europe, Asia, and Africa as mere islands in a large ocean. One source claims that rather than Athena, it was one of these beings that slew Enceladus, and posits that the rest of the Gigantes were scared away when the animals that these beings arrived with made unusual sounds. Astraeus was the chief of a legion of these beings that accompanied an expedition to India. Priapus's rape of Lotis was prevented by the braying of a donkey belonging to one of these beings. Another of them picked up the aulos that Athena abandoned, and later lost a music contest to Apollo, resulting in his ‚flaying. Midas received the golden touch as a reward for hospitably treating another one who drunkenly wandered into his garden. For 10 points, name these creatures, including Marsyas and Silenus, that lustily chased nymphs when they weren't attending to Dionysus.

ANSWER: satyrs [or satyroi; or satyros]

Result: 212 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 52948

Question: This character brings out a gold-decked chariot yoked by four brand-new steeds, but the horses eventually get crushed by a mace. In an earlier appearance, he throws out a dark smoke that not only renders him invisible, but also mutes the sounds of his weapons and footsteps. This character demoralizes one of his opponents by fashioning an image of his wife, then conspicuously grabbing her hair and decapitating her. Weapons wielded by this character include a trap made of a million snakes and a magic missile granted by Brahma, who refuses to make him immortal and changes his name from Meghanatha. Hanuman sets out to gather an herb to heal a grievous wound this character infl‚icted on an enemy who eventually overcomes him with the help of Vibhishana, who finds out that the yagna ritual is this demon's source of immortality. This demon arrives to avenge his uncle Kumbhakarna, but is bested by Lakshmana aftˆer three days of combat. For 10 points, name this son of Ravana, a rakshasa named for his superiority over the storm god.

ANSWER: Indrajit [or Meghanatha before mentioned; or Meghanaad before mentioned; or even conqueror of Indra or synonyms; do not accept or prompt on "Indra" or other wrong answers]

Result: 213 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Harvard | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 44873

Question: This male god assumes the role of a porter and boosts the strength of one of the newborn babies of a woman expecting triplets in a mythological story in which he and a bunch of goddesses become midwives. A consort of this god was given the title "She Who Runs Like an Arrow" and, along with his daughter, was represented as a gazelle or antelope. This god's son with Menhit was named Heka because of his role in activating each person's ka. The name of this god and mentions of his protective power appear in the full name of the pharaoh Khufu, and he formed a triad with the aforementioned wife Satet and Anuket to which a temple at Elephantine was dedicated. He was replaced by Hapi as the representation of the ‚flooding of the Nile, which leftˆ behind silt and clay that he then used for his most famous activity. For 10 points, name this ram-headed Egyptian god who created the gods and mankind on his potter's wheel.

ANSWER: Khnum [accept Khnemu and really anything with the consonants "k," "h", "n", and "m"]

Result: 214 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Maryland, Notre Dame, and Truman State | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 48810

Question: Poseidon performed this action on the Sperkheides before he began seducing their sister Diopatre, and undid it aˆfter he finished. Aˆfter another instance of this action, Artemis told Dion about his daughter Karya's a€air with Dionysus. Another instance of this action happened aftˆer a woman attempted to fetch a toy for her baby Amphissus, and then touched some unnatural blood. Aˆfter Orpheus addressed a prayer in the Garden of the Hesperides and sobbed, three beings performed this action. A woman who ‚ed her sword-wielding sexual partner Cinyras, whom she had tricked into an incestuous a€air, underwent this action and then gave birth to Adonis. As a reward for their hospitality towards Zeus and Hermes, Baucis and Philemon both underwent this action rather than dying. The daughter of the river god Peneus underwent this transformation just as she was about to be overtaken by Apollo. For 10 points, name this common transformation by which Leuke, Myrrha, and Daphne became poplar, myrrh, and laurel.

ANSWER: turning into a tree [or synonyms, accept dendrification; prompt on "turning into a plant"; prompt on "transforming" or other non-specic answers, accept these specic trees before they're mentioned at the end: poplar, walnut, elm, willow, myrrh, myrtle, linden, oak, and laurel]

Result: 215 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Michigan | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 48782

Question: In one poem, this deity expresses a dissatisfaction with the darkness of Ulfdalir. This deity's story, along with that of Thor, is told in the Haustlong. A funeral pyre was set up to burn the enemy of this most famous sibling of Auda, prompting that enemy's daughter Skadi to race to Asgard to seek vengeance. This deity steps in to restrain another god from starting a fight in Aegir's hall in the Lokasenna, in which Loki calls her the loosest of all the gods, for sleeping with her brother's killer. This goddess was lured to a wood and then abducted by an eagle, though she was turned into a nut and taken back by a falcon, who was really Loki. She carries a basket full of objects that instantly rot if people take them. This woman was stolen back from Thiazi because the gods began to grow old and grey in her absence. For 10 points, name this Norse goddess, the wife of Bragi, who kept the golden apples of eternal youth.

ANSWER: Idunn

Result: 216 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Michigan State | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 39032

Question: One holder of this post burned himself alive to recover from illness, and another was a humble guy who was covered with sores. A rabbit was thrown at a figure that brie‚y held this post and who took advantage of a tiny window of time to walk through a bonfire. Another holder of this post was accused of faking kindness to earn praise, upsetting her so much that she cried blood for ˆy-two years. In this role, one god created a hurricane, sending a bunch of monkeys scurrying towards forests and mountains. A deformed god who assumed this post was knocked out by a club, and in revenge, sent out a bunch of jaguars to eat everyone. That god later fucked with another holder of this post by seducing his wife Xochiquetzal, leading to a drought when that god of rain was too paralyzed by grief. Aˆer the reigns of four of them, Quetzalcoatl sprinkled his blood on bones to revive mankind into a viable and permanent form. For 10 points, name this post in Aztec mythology whose current holder rules the ˆh incarnation of the world.

ANSWER: the Five Suns in Aztec mythology

Result: 217 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Northwestern, William and Mary, and Stanford | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 48794

Question: This god was nearly caught trying to escape when a lute that he stole brushed against a tree, causing the earth to reverberate, but his pursuer was slowed because this god had tied his hair to the raˆfters while he was sleeping. This god was protected by a magic scarf while sleeping in rooms filled with snakes, centipedes, and wasps during one trial, and he passed another by finding an arrow in the middle of a ‚flaming field. Together with his good pal, the dwarf god Sukuna-hikona, he created the world and the art of medicine. He once gave compassionate advice to a white rabbit who was stripped of its fur by a crocodile, so the rabbit foretold that this man, and not his 80 cruel brothers, will marry Yakami, the princess of Inaba. He crawls out of a volcano to elope with Princess Suseri aˆer being chased through the underworld by her father Susanowo, who then gives up and accepts this kami as his son-in-law, telling him to rule Izumo as "Master of the Great Land." For 10 points, name this kami of happiness who rules the world before Ninigi.

ANSWER: Okuni-nushi [or Okuninushi Okami, or accept Onamuchi or Onamuji]

Result: 218 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Ohio State | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 34936

Question: This man was way too small for a coƒn that t his friend perfectly, so that friend passed his strength to this man with his dying breath before sealing himself up. Insulted that he was not invited to a king's celebration, he once destroyed all the steeples in that king's realm. In a less glamorous moment, he ran across an open fieeld, swung his forty-pound mace at a sleeping giant, but only provoked the response "Oh, how badly flees can bite!" before being stuff€ed into the giant's pocket. For the first thirty years this man's life, a curse kept him sitting on an oven before he was healed and was able to walk and fight. During one journey, this man defeated the monstrous Idolische, who possibly represented the Tartar Yoke, and on another journey he befriended the giant Sviatogor. On this hero's "first journey," he defeated a monster who hung out in a tree and used his whistle to murder strangers, then brought that defeated monster, Nightingale the Robber, back to Vladimir the Great. For 10 points, name this legendary bogatyr from Kiev, a peasant-prince recognized as a saint in the Russian Orthodox Church.

ANSWER: Ilya Muromets [accept either name; or Ilya of Murom]

Result: 219 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Penn A | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 38038

Question: This man ominously sees a bird kill itself for her young during his time sauntering around, eating only bread and water, and wearing only a plain shirt. This man sees a chapel with a chair ‚flanked by a worm-eater tree and some lilies in his dreams, in which he also receives competing o€ffers from black and white birds. Shortly aftˆer a hermit dies in vain to protect this man, his life is saved by a column of fire sent from the heavens. This man refuses to sleep with a lady, who kills herself and transforms into a demon, signifying that he passed a test of virtue. However, Claire, the daughter of King Brandegoris, uses a magic ring to bend him to her will. This man chooses to save a maiden rather than his brother, who was being whipped with thorns, leading that brother to go to comical lengths to murder him in retribution. This man's father of the same name was killed in a campaign against Claudas. This man is the only one of his group to return alive from Sarras, and he was rescued along with the aforementioned brother, Lionel, by the Lady of the Lake. For 10 points, name this knight of the Round Table who along with Sir Percival and Sir Galahad finds the Holy Grail.

ANSWER: Sir Bors the Younger

Result: 220 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Virginia | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 41140

Question: A celebration of the birth of this god begins with the youngest female member of the family applying the red reeka mark to the male members of the family. In one ritual celebrating him, the Sunderkand is read aloud. The worship of this god was popularized by a Hindi language work of Tulsidas which has a name refl‚ecting a "sacred lake" of his deeds. During a festival named for this god, idols of him are taken out of temples and paraded across the streets in a chariot procession before the gathered onlookers swim in the Sarayu river. Hindus oˆen repeat this god's name twice as a greeting and frequently invoke him at death, as Gandhi did aˆer being fatally shot. He is depicted wearing a conical hat called the Kiritamukuta and holding a bow with his leftˆ hand and an arrow with his right. The holy city of Ayodhya was this god's birthplace. For 10 points, name this incarnation of Vishnu frequently worshipped alongside his wife Sita.

ANSWER: Rama [prompt on "Vishnu"]

Result: 221 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Virginia | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 41151

Question: According to legend, these people owned a magical cup with seven rings filled with an immortality-granting drink that could re‚flect any location in the seven heavens. One of these people planted four spears topped with slabs of meat on a raftˆ, to which he tied starving eagles whose desperate fl‚apping carried him into the sky. Another of them forced his son to run through two pillars of re to prove that that son had not raped his stepmother Sudaba. Harpagus was forced to eat his own son at a banquet as punishment for exposing, rather than killing, one of these people as a baby. A more insane one of them murdered his brother Smerdis before dying from a thigh wound identical to the mortal one he dealt the Apis Bull. A wealthy king made war on one of these people aˆer the Pythia ambiguously foretold the destruction of a great empire. In myth, these peoples included Jamshid, Kai Kobad and Kai Khosrow. For 10 points, name this set of rulers whose "book" recounts the legend of Rustam and Sohrab, and was written by Firdausi.

ANSWER: shahs of Iran [or kings of Persia; or kings of Iran; or any answer referring to rulers of Iran/Persia;prompt on "Persians" or "Iranians" or even "Medes"; prompt also on "kings"]

Result: 222 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: WUStL, Berkeley A, and VCU | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 48836

Question: This man removed the daggers from the hearts of two bumbling would-be assassins, and revived them with the herb of immortality, thus inaugurating a race of pierced-chest people. When a giant arrived late to an assembly of the gods this man convoked atop a mountain, he had that giant beheaded. He was born from the belly of his father's corpse aˆer his father was executed. This man developed hemiplegia as a result of his work, and his hands and feet were thickly callused. He passed by his house without entering once when his wife was in labor, once when his son called out to him, and once when he was ten years old, in a story showcasing his devotion. A yellow dragon and a black turtle assisted this man, who continued the work his father Gun tried to do with self-growing soil. For thirteen years, this man and Houji chopped the occasional mountain ridge with a battle axe while digging canals. For 10 points, name this mythical founder of the Xia Dynasty, a Chinese hero who managed to get the Great Flood under control.

ANSWER: Yu the Great [or Da Yu]

Result: 223 | ACF Nationals | 2014 | Round: Yale | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 41133

Question: This god is sometimes depicted in vase paintings playing an improvised wedding song for Zeus and Europa. Aftˆer Euphemus accepts a giftˆ from this god, who appeared to him in the guise of Eurypylus, he has a dream in which he has sex with this god's daughter. The Aeneid reports that an erstwhile ally of Hector named Misenus was killed by this god aftˆer losing to him in a contest. A festival in which girls ceremonially battled each other to the death commemorates the accidentally deadly fight between this god's two foster daughters, Pallas and Athena. This god guides the stranded Argonauts back to the Mediterranean aˆer they get lost in his namesake lake in Libya. He was accompanied by several daimones who had two horse-legs in place of arms, who were known by either a plural form of this god's name, or as Ichthyocentaurs. This god's shoulders were adorned with sea shells, and he sounded his conch to control the waves. For 10 points, name this son of Amphitrite and Poseidon, a merman who carried a similarly-named three-pronged spear.

ANSWER: Triton

Result: 224 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Chicago A, Columbia A, and VCU | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 31096

Question: In many depictions, this deity's eyebrows are made of serpents that entwine lower down on the face to form a nose. This god governs a locale where toads guard the cooking pots of the lord of the winds. Four jug-holding figures at the corners of the earth are named for this god, who was depicted with blue goggle-like markings around his eyes and prominent fangs at mountaintop shrines. This god sired a moon deity with a jade-skirted goddess of the flood named Chalchiuhtlicue. This patron god of the third sun controls an alternative to Mictlan for victims of lightning strike, drowning, or water-borne disease. For 10 points, name this namesake of a watery underworld, the Aztec rain god.

ANSWER: Tlaloc [or Tlaloque]

Result: 225 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Chicago A, Columbia A, and VCU | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 31101

Question: In Algonquin lore, these creatures include Mikchich, the uncle of Glooskap. In the Iroquois creation myth, Sky Woman lands on one of these creatures; thus the Iriquois call North America this creature's "island." A golden one of these creatures gave the sword "Heaven's Will" to the Vietnamese hero Le Loi. In China, a black one of these creatures is the sacred animal of the north. An example of these animals, which kept Mount Mandara from sinking during the churning of the ocean of milk, was Kurma, the second avatar of Vishnu. For 10 points, name this long-lived reptile which, in many Asian cosmologies, supports some number of elephants who in turn hold up the world.

ANSWER: In Algonquin lore, these creatures include Mikchich, the uncle of Glooskap. In the Iroquois creation myth, Sky Woman lands on one of these creatures; thus the Iriquois call North America this creature's "island." A golden one of these creatures gave the sword "Heaven's Will" to the Vietnamese hero Le Loi. In China, a black one of these creatures is the sacred animal of the north. An example of these animals, which kept Mount Mandara from sinking during the churning of the ocean of milk, was Kurma, the second avatar of Vishnu. For 10 points, name this long-lived reptile which, in many Asian cosmologies, supports some number of elephants who in turn hold up the world.

Result: 226 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Dartmouth and Notre Dame | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 31121

Question: In Book 5 of the Iliad, this is the oldest deity who heals Aeneas. This deity struggled in the place to which Callimachus's fourth hymn is dedicated, after which the Inopus river turned gold. This goddess was attacked by a giant who is now pecked at by two vultures in Tartarus, named Tityos. This goddess received more help after a necklace bribed Eileithyia. This sister of Asteria, who was seduced in the form of a quail, stayed for nine days and nights on a floating island now anchored by pillars, usually identified as Delos. A boast about having more children than this goddess, made by Tantalus's daughter, resulted in the slaying of Niobe's children. She was hounded by the Python during her wanderings while pregnant. For 10 points, name this Titaness who bore Artemis and Apollo.

ANSWER: Leto [or Latona; do not accept "Leda"]

Result: 227 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Dorman - Carleton University - LASA B | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 37452

Question: It's not childbirth, but one god of this domain had a name mistranslated as "placenta king," and displaced an older god of it named Iah. During the Middle Kingdom, this domain was represented symbolically by a lake at Karnak, and by the youngest member of the Theban Triad, who was the son of Mut and Amun. One god of this domain allowed Kheru-Ur and four other new deities to be born from Nut after losing one seventy-second of his power, elongating the year by five days. This realm was represented by Khonsu, who lost a gambling game to Thoth. This object also corresponds to a body part removed in combat with Set. For 10 points, name this cosmic object which ancient Egyptians equated with the ripped-out left eye of Horus.

ANSWER: the moon

Result: 228 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Harvard - Florida A - Louisville A | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 37464

Question: One of these creatures named Sivushko crosses the Black Mire dramatically in the tale of Ilya Muromets. These animals accompanied representations of the Sun, Day, and Night who served Baba Yaga. Hofvarpnir and the seven-headed Uchchaihshravas exemplify these creatures. An immortal talking one, Arion, was born to Demeter after she was raped by Poseidon. Two of these animals sired by the harpy Podarge and Zephyrus, named Balius and Xanthus, were given to Achilles. In the Iliad, a set of these animals belonging to Rhesus is stolen by Odysseus and Diomedes; earlier, in Thrace, four man-eating ones were owned by another Diomedes. A winged one of these animals sprung from Medusa's neck. For 10 points, name these hoofed creatures that include Bellerophon's buddy Pegasus.

ANSWER: horses [or stallions; or mares]

Result: 229 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Illinois A - Rutgers A - Alabama A | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 37493

Question: In Ovid's Metamorphoses, this character recounts the story of Caenis and the battle between the Centaurs and Lapiths. This person avoided death by using a spear to pole-vault into a tree during the Calydonian boar hunt. This man's son Antilochus was killed by the Aethiopian warrior Memnon in battle, and his shapeshifting brother Periclymenus was shot in the form of an eagle by Heracles, who killed all this man's siblings. In Book II of the Iliad, this man appears in a false dream sent to Agamemnon by Zeus. This "Gerenian horseman" and son of Neleus ran a "sandy-shored" kingdom which welcomed Telemachus before Sparta, though he couldn't say what happened to Odysseus. For 10 points, name this king of Pylos, a wise old man in the Homeric epics.

ANSWER: Nestor

Result: 230 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Illinois A - Rutgers A - Alabama A | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 37499

Question: One of these animals appears inside the Gundestrup cauldron next to a seated god holding a necklace and a serpent. In Hungarian folklore, Hunor and Magor chase a white one of these animals to Scythia. On the Pillar of the Boatmen, the head of the Celtic god Cernunnos resembles this animal. A part of this animal was stuck in Surt's eye after being used to kill Beli by Frey. Four of these creatures chew on the upper leaves of Yggdrassil. Two hunting dogs recognized one of these animals, which later bore Oisin after becoming human. In this form, Sadhbh met her husband Finn mac Cool. During his third labor, Heracles caught a bronze-footed animal of this kind in Ceryneia. For 10 points, name this animal which was eaten by hunting dogs after Actaeon became one for seeing Artemis bathe.

ANSWER: deer [or stags; or harts; or hinds; or does]

Result: 231 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: J. Sargeant Reynolds - OSU - St. John's | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 37515

Question: One ruler of this city was the father of Tisamenus, and was killed by Telephus on Mysia, which meant this city had no king at the Trojan War. After defending this city against King Erginus, Heracles was given the hand of Megara in marriage. This city was once ruled by Thersander, and its usurper Lycus abducted Antiope, though Antiope's children killed him when they grew up. Music moved the stones around this city into place as the twins Amphion and Zethus built its walls. This city's founder was followed a cow until it rested, and sowed the teeth of a serpent sacred to Ares to form its first men. The Epigoni took over this city, a feat that their fathers, led by Polynices, failed to do. For 10 points, name this city founded by Cadmus, whose later kings included Oedipus.

ANSWER: Thebes [or Thebai; or Cadmea]

Result: 232 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: LASA A - Truman State A - Penn B | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 37534

Question: In the Ulster Cycle, one of these objects owned by Celtchar is kept in a cauldron of venomous black blood. One of these named Ron or Rhongomynaid was used by King Arthur. The warrior woman Scathach gave her trainee one of these objects. The island of Onogoro was made when brine dripped from a jeweled one of these objects, which was used to draw up Japan's islands by Izanagi and Izanami. Chiron's wedding gift to Peleus was one of these objects, which was later used to heal Telephus by Achilles. A sea monster's bones were used to make Gae Bulg, one of these things wielded by Cu Chulainn. Another one was stuck in Yggdrasil as a god hung from it to learn the runes. For 10 points, name these objects exemplified by Odin's Gungnir and the weapon used by Longinus on Jesus's side.

ANSWER: spears [or lances; or javelins; or polearms; accept naginata due to ambiguities with the Japan clue]

Result: 233 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Maryland A - Kansas State - Penn C | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 37546

Question: One of these animals became the Hoji after being shot at Nasu; the body of that one was disguised as the beautiful woman Tamamo-no-Mae, and became the Killing Stone after death. Some of these animals were known by the Heian court title myobu. A woman named Daji was possessed by one during the last Shang emperor's reign. In another country, these animals eat the livers or hearts out of young men after posing as seductresses. Spirit versions of this animal include the Korean gumiho, the Chinese huli jing, messengers depicted at Fushimi who serve the rice god Inari, and other Japanese kitsune. For 10 points, name this animal whose oldest examples in east Asian mythology have nine tails.

ANSWER: foxes [or fox spirits; or nine-tailed foxes; or fox women; prompt on "shapeshifters"]

Result: 234 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: MCTC | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 37569

Question: These beings live in a city illuminated by jewels, whose entrance is surrounded by anthills. One of these beings sacrificed himself to turn the tide of a war and gets a one-day marriage to the dazzling goddess Mohini in return. That one, Iravan, was the son of Arjuna and a princess of these characters named Ulupi. These inhabitants of Patala are the offspring of Kadru, who enslaved her sister Vinata. They include Vasuki and their leader is the massive sage Shesha, on whom Vishnu often rests. A ruse preventing these beings from drinking amrta, the nectar of immortality, began their lifelong enmity with Garuda the eagle. For 10 points, name these rain-controlling, reptilian demigods of Indian mythology.

ANSWER: nagas [or nagadevas; prompt on "snakes" or "serpents" or "cobras;" accept nagi or nagini]

Result: 235 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Michigan State - Waterloo A | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 37599

Question: This region was home to the author of the 48-book Dionysiaca, the last epic written in Ancient Greek. A mythical king of this place sacrificed foreign travelers to avert famine until Heracles broke from chains and killed him. In this home of Nonnus and the mythical Busiris, the gods turned into animals while fleeing from Typhon. Hypermnestra refused to kill a suitor from this place, which was once ruled by Epaphus, the son of Io. This place, named for a king who had forty-nine of his fifty sons murdered by the Danaids, included temples to the syncretic god Serapis. On his return from Troy, Menelaus wrestled the shape-shifting Proteus in this region before sailing north again. For 10 points, name this region containing Pharos, where ethnic Greeks syncretized Typhon with Set and learned about Isis.

ANSWER: Egypt [or Aegyptus; prompt on answers such as "Pharos" or the "Nile Delta"; do not prompt on "Africa" or "Libya" or "Ethiopia" at any point]

Result: 236 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: MIT A - Illinois B - TAMU A | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 37625

Question: In a street celebration honoring this deity, people make human pyramids to reach a pot called the matki and break it. This deity told a pregnant mother about how to make the Chakravyuha military formation, though the unborn baby Abhimanyu only heard some of it and died at age sixteen screwing it up. This deity saved a village from a storm sent by Indra by raising the Govardhan hill over the village. This brother of Balarama defeated Kamsa, his evil uncle. His ranging with cowherd girls called gopis and his sucking of the demoness Putana's breastmilk are celebrated during Holi. During the Kurukshetra war, he declared "Now I am become death, destroyer of worlds" while revealing his full splendor. For 10 points, name this avatar of Vishnu who served as Arjuna's charioteer in the Bhagavad-Gita.

ANSWER: Krishna [or Krsna]

Result: 237 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Packet by Brown A, Caltech B, and Colonel By | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 30803

Question: In Hesiod and Homer, this being has the epithet "erigeneia." A son of this divine being had a funeral at which a group of birds emerged from the pyre, after that Ethiopian son was killed by Achilles. Mount Hymmetus, a hill frequented by this deity, is the spot where Procris's husband Cephalus met her. This mother of Memnon raised Notus, Zephyrus, and other winds with Astraeus. After sleeping with Ares, she was cursed with desire for young human men such as Orion, and she failed to stop another lover from shriveling into a grasshopper after she asked Zeus to grant him eternal life but not eternal youth. This goddess lives with Tithonus on the banks of Oceanus, and her tears become dew on plants. For 10 points, name this "rosy-fingered" goddess of the dawn.

ANSWER: Eos [or Aurora; prompt on "Dawn" until the last word of the question is read]

Result: 238 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Penn A - Northmont - Chicago B | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 37635

Question: This deity sued Ares for murdering a child of this deity named Hallirhotius. According to Ovid, on the first day of the Trojan War, Achilles choked a son of this deity named Cygnus who was otherwise invulnerable. During the Gigantomachy, this deity buried Polybotes under Cos. After being born, this dedicatee of the Isthmian games was hidden amongst sheep or raised by the dog-headed Telchines. Hesione was offered to a monster sent by this god after king Laomedon failed to pay for the walls of Troy. This seducer of Aethra and father of Chrysaor turned some Phaeacians to stone for helping Odysseus get home. For 10 points, name this father of the Cyclops Polyphemus, who made the earth shake with his trident.

ANSWER: Poseidon [accept Neptune or Neptunus just to be nice]

Result: 239 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: Rice - Vanderbilt B - Caltech A | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 37653

Question: Miners from this culture had to appease an archdemon who crawled out just to watch human babies sleep at night. This people believed each mountain had a guardian spirit called an apu, and saw silver as the tears of the moon. One of their goddesses became a rock by leaping into the ocean with a child she conceived by eating sperm in the form of a fruit. These people believed in the trickster Coniraya and the underworld demon Supay. Their creator god destroyed a race of idiot giants made from stone, and they arose where a golden staff sank into the earth. They saw the Milky Way as a jug full of rain, and believed that a great flood called Unu Pachakuti was sent by Viracocha. For 10 points, name this empire of the Americas created by Manco Capac, which revered the sun god Inti.

ANSWER: Incan civilization [or Quechua people; prompt on "Andeans" or "Peruvians" or "indigenous South Americans"; do not accept "Tawantinsuyu" from jackasses, because that is their name for the territory encompassing the whole known world, not their own people]

Result: 240 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: UCSD | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 37685

Question: This hero killed a Greek king's daughter in battle at Ventry on the White Strand. He's not Theseus, but he led a group which gets trapped in a banqueting hall by being rooted to their seats. A woman who spurned this hero later gets a craving for rowan berries. This man either held a sharp spear against his head or inhaled poison to stay awake and slay the harp-playing fire goblin Aillen. This man lets a companion die due to the "love spot" on the companion's forehead, and avenges his father, who died at the battle of Knock, after retrieving a Treasure Bag. This man's poet son returned from Tir na Nog after 300 years, and he himself fought against Goll mac Morna. For 10 points, name this father of Ossian, who burnt his thumb cooking the Salmon of Knowledge and led the Fianna.

ANSWER: Finn macCool [or Fionn mac Cumhail; or Demne Máel]

Result: 241 | ACF Regionals | 2014 | Round: WUSTL - Columbia B - Berkeley A | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 37707

Question: A female figure appears at this event using snakes as reins to ride an angry wolf, which was subdued by four warriors after she dismounted. A riddle contest ends with a question about this event in the Vafthrudnismal, stumping a giant who did not know what was whispered here. A dwarf named Lit ran the wrong way and got killed at this event, at which a blood-red wake appeared on the water after the giantess Hyrrokin pushed the ship Hringhorn out to sea. A resident of the hall Breidablik named Nanna collapsed at this event. This event became necessary when the rider Hermod failed to convince Thokk to weep. The self-replicating armband Draupnir was dropped onto a pyre at this event. For 10 points, name this event commemorating the mistletoe-induced death of the Norse god of beauty.

ANSWER: Baldur's funeral pyre [do not accept "death of Baldur"]

Result: 242 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 47515

Question: One goddess of these locations was banished and later killed by her sister for causing a fire, although her spirit escaped and she was deified. In Shinto mythology, eight of these features formed at the end of creation and the beginning of death, when Izanagi dismembered Kagu-tsuchi. In Hawaiian mythology, these locations are governed by Pele. In Greek mythology, Zeus throws one of these geographic features on Typhon to trap him, and Hephaestus' forges are located under them. For 10 points, name these geographic features, examples of which include Mauna Kea, Mount Fuji and Mount Etna, that sometimes erupt magma.

ANSWER: volcanoes [prompt on "mountains"]

Result: 243 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 47797

Question: This deity's wife was the personification of Upper Egypt's seventeenth nome, and his daughter was usually depicted as a star-bodied snake. During ceremonies worshipping this god, a black-and-white cowhide is carried on a pole before processions. This god, known as the "subduer of nine bows," may have been conceived when his mother Nephthys disguised herself as her sister and conceived this god with Osiris. This deity's cult was centered at Cynopolis, and priests performing the Opening of the Mouth ceremony wore the mask of this god. He weighed hearts against the Feather of Ma'at. For 10 points, name this jackal-headed Egyptian god of embalming and death.

ANSWER: Anubis [or Anpu; or Inpu; or Anapa; or Ienpu; or Yinepu]

Result: 244 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 47808

Question: On the night before a battle, this man dreamt that he was tied to a wheel that plunged into black water full of serpents. This man was conceived at the castle Tintagel after his father disguised himself as Gorlois to sleep with Igraine. Following his last battle, this figure was taken to the Isle of Avalon to recuperate. This king unknowingly slept with his half-sister Morgause to conceive a man who mortally wounded this figure at the Battle of Camlann. This son of Uther Pendragon and father of Mordred married the daughter of King Leodegrance, Guinevere. For 10 points, name this ruler of Camelot who presided over the Round Table and wielded Excalibur.

ANSWER: King Arthur Pendragon

Result: 245 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 47831

Question: This man was the father of Euneus by Hypsipyle, the Queen of Lemnos, and later accidentally killed Cyzicus and gave him a grand funeral. At the advice of Phineus, he sent a dove through the Symplegades. He died after he was struck by a rotting piece of wood, and he lost a sandal in the River Anavros. This man murdered Apsyrtus and was absolved of that crime by Circe. His bride-to-be, the princess of Corinth, was burned to death by a cursed dress. Aeëtes had him plow a field with fire-breathing oxen and sow that field with dragon teeth, which he succeeded in doing with help from Medea. For 10 points, name this leader of the Argonauts who recovered the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Jason [or Iásōn]

Result: 246 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 47546

Question: This figure turned into a snake and slithered through a mountain to drink a potion created from the wisest being Kvasir, after which this figure transformed into an eagle to escape the potion's guardian Gunnlod. In another myth, this figure disguised himself as the sorcerer Grimnir and traveled to the court of Geirröd, where he predicted that the king would fall on his sword. This deity will be swallowed alive by the wolf Fenrir during Ragnarök. Huginn and Muninn fly around Midgard daily and whisper secrets to this rider of the eight-legged Sleipnir. For 10 points, name this one-eyed ruler of the Aesir and Asgard, the Norse god of battle and wisdom.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wōden; or Wôtan; or Wôdan]

Result: 247 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 47557

Question: This god's wife gave birth to Melinoë by Zeus, who disguised himself as this god. This god pursued the nymph Minthe, who was turned into the mint plant. After killing Medusa, Perseus escaped the other Gorgons with this god's Helm of Darkness. One person entered this god's realm by giving three barley cakes to the guard, while another person lulled that guard to sleep with his lyre. This owner of Cerberus abducted his wife while she was picking flowers in Nysa and tricked her into eating pomegranate seeds so that she would have to stay with him. For 10 points, name this husband of Persephone and Greek god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Hades [or Aidoneus; or Plouton; or Clymenus; or Polydegmon; do not prompt on or accept "Pluto"]

Result: 248 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 47665

Question: In one folk tale, a bamboo cutter finds a baby exiled from this location in a glowing bamboo stalk, and in another, Wu Gang attempts to cut down a self-healing laurel tree at this location. In one mythology, Tecciztecatl became this object after a rabbit was thrown in his face, and other mythologies view this object as the head of Coyolxauhqui ("koh-yol-SHAW-kee") or the left eye of Horus. The principal Greek goddess of this object fell in love with Endymion and asked Zeus to put him in an eternal sleep. Another Greek goddess of this object also protected hunters and virgins. For 10 points, name this celestial body associated with Selene and Artemis, often contrasted with the Sun.

ANSWER: moon

Result: 249 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 47693

Question: One of these figures arrived to a duel to find himself facing a clay statue and was tricked into standing on his shield. Another of these creatures almost won a wager regarding his ability to build city walls in eighteen months, until his horse Svadilfari was seduced by Loki disguised as a mare. Another of these creatures stole the hammer Mjölnir and hid it miles underground, demanding Freyja's hand in marriage as ransom before being slain by the cross-dressing Thor. Hrungnir and Thrym are creatures of this type, as is Surtr, who will kill Freyr and set the world ablaze at Ragnarök. For 10 points, name these frequent foes of the Aesir who often hail from Jötunheim.

ANSWER: giants [accept thurs; accept frost giants or hrimthurs before "Surtr"; accept jötunn or jötnar before "Jotunheim"; do not prompt on or accept "fire giants" or "eldjötnar" or "mountain giants" or "bergrisar"]

Result: 250 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 47704

Question: Völsung was conceived after Frigg gave one of these objects to his father Rerir. Skírnir presents Draupnir and these objects to Gerðr on behalf of Freyr to ask for her hand in marriage. Thjazi stole these objects along with Idunn with the help of Loki. Aphrodite gave three of these to Hippomenes, while Heracles was told to retrieve these in his Eleventh Labor from the Garden of the Hesperides. Eris threw one of these objects into the wedding of Peleus and Thetis, with a label indicating that it was "for the fairest." For 10 points, name these fruits, golden ones of which distracted Atalanta during a race and which Paris awarded to Aphrodite.

ANSWER: apples [accept golden apples]

Result: 251 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 47729

Question: Cherokee legend holds that this entity was formed from cornmeal dropped by a fleeing dog. Elsewhere, this entity is called the "Road of the Warriors," and the son of Attila is said to ride down this entity when Hungary is under threat. Other Finno-Ugric peoples called this entity the "Pathway of the Birds." In another tradition, magpies form a bridge every year on the seventh day of the seventh month over this entity, which was created to separate two lovers, a princess and a cowherd. One Greek myth describes the formation of this entity when Hera woke up to find that Heracles was breastfeeding from her. For 10 points, name this astronomical feature, the galaxy that contains our solar system.

ANSWER: Milky Way [prompt on "Gili Ulisvsdanvyi"; prompt on "Hadak Útja"; prompt on "Linnunrata" or "Linnutee"; prompt on "Yinhe" or "Eunha" or "Ginga" or "Silver River"; prompt on "Galaxias"]

Result: 252 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 47760

Question: The King James Version of the Bible translates the re'em to be one of these creatures. King Donmyeong of Goguryeo was said to have ridden one of these creatures, whose lair was supposedly found in November 2012. The Japanese version of these creatures is the kirin. The Danish throne is supposedly made from a body part of these creatures, although they were most likely the tusks of narwhals, which are called these creatures of the sea. The product of its namesake anatomical figure is called alicorn and has the power to negate poison. For 10 points, name this single-horned legendary animal that could only be tamed by virgin women.

ANSWER: unicorns

Result: 253 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 47779

Question: This figure transformed Queen Gerana into a crane and set the queen's descendants against the Pygmies after that queen declared herself more beautiful than this figure. This goddess turned Tiresias into a woman after he struck a pair of mating snakes with his staff. This goddess sent two serpents to kill a young boy, with whom she reconciled after he became a god by offering her daughter Hebe's hand in marriage. During the Judgment of Paris, this goddess offered Paris control of all of Europe and Asia. After Hermes killed Argus, this goddess placed his eyes on her sacred bird, the peacock. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of marriage and the family, the sister and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera [do not prompt on or accept "Juno"]

Result: 254 | BELLOCO | 2014 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 47878

Question: This man sought refuge in the court of Tyndareus after his father's death at the hands of Thyestes. He incurred Apollo's wrath by humiliating Chryses and later angered another man by taking his concubine Briseis. This man once lured his daughter to Aulis by claiming that she would be married to Achilles; in reality, he sacrificed that daughter, Iphigenia, to Artemis. This man was avenged by his children Electra and Orestes after he and his concubine Cassandra were assassinated by Aegisthus and this man's wife, Clytemnestra. For 10 points, name this King of Mycenae, the brother of Menelaus and commander-in-chief of the Achaeans during the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Agamemnon

Result: 255 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 51099

Question: In Maori myth, this event takes place when the children of Ranginui and Papatuanuku force the two gods apart. In the Enuma Elish, this occurs after Marduk takes the Tablets of Destiny from Kingu when he dismembers Tiamat. The Chinese story of this event was preceded by an 18,000-year-process of growth and by the death of Pan Gu. In Norse myth, Vili and Ve aid in this process, which causes a flood of blood to come from the corpse of the giant Ymir as his parts are redistributed. For 10 points, name this process which occurs ex nihilo in six days in the Book of Genesis.

ANSWER: creation of the world [or creation of the earth; or formation of the earth; accept separation of the earth and sky until "flood" is read; accept answers indicating the population or design of the world]

Result: 256 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 51289

Question: The Navajo hero twins used these objects to guide the direction of lightning which turned monsters to stone. Dronacharya was a master of this object, and trained others to use them with the aid of a reflecting pool and a fish. Gandiva is one of these objects owned by Arjuna. One of these was stuck on the isle of Lemnos for nine years with a man suffering from snakebite; that example of these weapons, which was prophesied to help end the Trojan War, was given to Philoctetes by Heracles. For 10 points, name this weapon used by Paris to target Achilles' heel, and to aim at an apple by William Tell.

ANSWER: bows and arrows [do NOT accept or prompt on "arrows" alone]

Result: 257 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 51319

Question: Upon entering Athens, Theseus threw two of these creatures higher than a building to prove his manliness. Epaphus's mother became one of these creatures, which were guarded unsuccessfully by the two-headed dog Orthrus, and Thrinacia was home to many of them. A common epithet ascribes the eyes of this creature to Hera. Daedalus built a wooden one of these creatures for Pasiphae. Cadmus followed one of these creatures to the spot of Thebes. The peacock gained tail spots after the thousand-eyed watchman Argos failed to guard another of these mammals, which had previously been Zeus's lover Io. For 10 points, name this frequently-sacrificed herd animal.

ANSWER: cattle [or cows; or heifers; or bovines; or cattle; or oxen; or bulls]

Result: 258 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 51342

Question: This god crashed the chariot of the arrogant king Harald Wartooth to kill him after helping Harald win a battle. This god made Baugi drill a hole in a mountainside, then slid through in the form of a snake to enter Suttung's lair. This god feeds scraps to Geri and Freki, two hounds, and also owns an animal conceived as walls were being built around Asgard. This father of Vidarr and rider of the eight-legged horse Sleipnir hung himself from Yggdrassil on a spear for nine days to learn the runes. This eventual victim of Fenrir gave up one eye to increase his renowned wisdom. For 10 points, name this ruler of Asgard, the chief of the Norse gods.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wotan]

Result: 259 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 51364

Question: This place's harbor is dedicated to Phorcys, and a bloody vision appears here to the prophet Theoclymenus. A ruler of this place departs to plant an oar in the ground. In this place, the virtue of xenia is exemplified by Eumaeus the swineherd. A ceiling rafter in this society was used to hang twelve maids by its ruler, who once salted the fields here before Palamedes put a baby in front of his plow. A bed carved out of an olive tree is hidden on this island, where a funeral shroud is repeatedly unwoven as its master is waylaid by Calypso. For 10 points, name this island kingdom where suitors hound Penelope as she waits for her husband Odysseus.

ANSWER: Ithaca

Result: 260 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 51382

Question: A major symbol of this deity was a knot called the tyet, and this deity was often depicted with a throne as a headdress. This deity once invoked the names of seven scorpions to heal a child of a poisonous bite. Other exploits by this deity include travelling to Byblos to retrieve a coffin and the creation of a serpent from another god's saliva. This deity received the secret name of Ra. With the aid of Nephthys, this deity recovered the body parts of her husband, allowing him to be resurrected as the ruler of the underworld. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the sister and wife of Osiris and the mother of Horus.

ANSWER: Isis [or Aset; or Iset; or Ast]

Result: 261 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 51386

Question: In non-Jewish lore, King Solomon enslaved these non-human creatures and used them to build the Temple. The qarin are a subtype of these creatures who tag along with individual people, and they also include the watery marid. They're not demons, but the leader of these creatures refused to bow to Adam in the Garden of Eden; that being, Iblis, brought the "Satanic verses" to Muhammad. These beings, which include the especially-fiery ifrit, were given free will after Allah made them out of smokeless fire. For 10 points, name these spirits from Islamic and Arabic lore, who can be trapped in talismans such as magic lamps.

ANSWER: jinn [or djinn; or jinni; accept "genies"]

Result: 262 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 51139

Question: In one of this people's myths, a shapeshifter in an orchard disguises himself as an old woman to seduce the goddess of fruit. An ancestor of these people saw a white sow suckling thirty white piglets. This society got three books of prophecy from a prophetess who burned six of the original set. One of their gods protected them with a volcanic hot spring, and was honored with an open gate in times of war. The Golden Bough was a mythical object for these people, who worshipped the "Unconquered Sun" and adapted many Etruscan gods. For 10 points, name this ancient people whose gods included Pomona, two-faced Janus, and the war goddess Minerva.

ANSWER: Romans [or Romani; do NOT accept "Greeks" at any point]

Result: 263 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 51149

Question: One member of this group killed the inhospitable king Amycus with a single blow to the elbow. Euphemus joined this group, which fought the Bebryces and dealt with a pair of rocks which repeatedly pulled apart and clashed together. This group made use of a sacred plank of oak which could talk. Castor and Pollux joined this larger group, which employed the wings of Calais and Zetes to deal with the Harpies. Its leader passed King Aeetes's challenges in Colchis and married the sorceress Medea. For 10 points, name this group of Greek heroes which sailed for the Golden Fleece aboard a similarly-named ship, led by Jason.

ANSWER: Argonauts [or Argonautai]

Result: 264 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 51164

Question: This god is often shown wearing a hat with a peacock feather in it. In one text, this god likens three temperaments called gunas to fruit. This god was threatened by the poison breastmilk of the demoness Putana. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada founded a society devoted to this god, who met Radha, befriended cowherd girls, and stole butter during his childhood. This god said "Now I am become death, destroyer of worlds" and revealed his full glory after asking Arjuna to keep fighting in his role as a charioteer. For 10 points, name this god who speaks in the Bhagavad Gita, the eighth avatar of Vishnu, who is addressed at the start of a great mantra after the word "Hare" ("HAH-rey").

ANSWER: Krishna [or Krsna; prompt on "Vishnu" until mentioned]

Result: 265 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 51180

Question: Many sources conflate this deity with the ruler of a legendary city known as Tollan. This god poured his own blood over bones retrieved from the underworld in order to create humans for the fifth world era. This god looked into a mirror after sleeping with his celibate priestess sister, prompting him to throw himself on a pyre in shame. This god of the morning star had an aspect called Ehecatl who controlled the wind. Under the fifth sun, this rival of Tezcatlipoca sailed east on a raft of serpents, which may have caused worshippers of this god to conflate him with Hernan Cortez. For 10 points, name this Aztec "feathered serpent" god.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 266 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 51186

Question: This deity holds off against several others in the most famous flyting. In the Eddas, this sibling of Helblindi succeeded at one escape when a burning forest lights the eagle Thiazi on fire. This god lost a fight in which he and his opponent were both in the form of seals, surrendering the Brisingamen necklace; he also lost an eating contest to fire. This husband of Sigyn got chained underneath the earth with a snake dripping venom into his eyes, in part because he tricked the blind god Hodr into firing mistletoe at his brother. This god plans to ride a ship of nails, and fathered both Hel and Fenrir. For 10 points, name this malicious Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 267 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 51201

Question: According to legends about King David and Muhammad, this creature saved each of their lives as they hid in a cave from soldiers. This creature is Mr. Jaggers' nickname for Bentley Drummle in Dickens' Great Expectations. The heads of these creatures often display pedipalps, and they have liquid-filled chelicerae. A son of the sky god Nyame who takes this creature's form gathers all the stories of the world. The west African trickster god Anansi takes this form, which Athena gave to a girl who dared challenge her in a weaving contest. For 10 points, name this order of arthropods whose spinnerets let them make webs.

ANSWER: spiders [or Order Araneae; prompt on "arachnids"]

Result: 268 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 51216

Question: This domain is governed by the Haitian loa Erzulie. An Indian god of this phenomenon, the consort of Rati, became bodiless after Shiva's third eye incinerated him, but rode a large parrot and wielded a bow made of sugarcane and bees before that. Another deity of this kind was injured in the wrist by Diomedes in the Iliad; that goddess of this domain bestowed favor upon the Trojan prince Anchises. Psyche was visited by a younger god of this realm, whose mother was caught in a magic chain years after she emerged out of the seafoam. For 10 points, name this aspect of human affairs governed by Kama and Aphrodite.

ANSWER: love gods/goddesses [accept "desire," "romance," "sexuality," or close synonyms in place of "love"; accept "goddesses" or "deities" in place of "gods"; do NOT accept or prompt on "marriage" or "childbirth"]

Result: 269 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 51231

Question: Nanook of the North was named for one of these creatures which determines the success of Inuit hunts. In Korean myth, one of these animals was told to eat only garlic and mugwort in a cave for one hundred days, after which she became a human. The Ainu people of Hokkaido hold these creatures sacred. In Greek myth, Arcas is turned into one of these creatures after his mom reneges on her virginity oath with Zeus. That mom, who gets put into the sky as this animal, is Callisto. For 10 points, name this type of animal which often symbolizes Russia, and whose tail is tipped off by the North Star in the constellation Ursa Minor.

ANSWER: bears [accept polar bears during the first sentence, but NOT thereafter]

Result: 270 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 51256

Question: This being's death precipitated the spawning of a lizard with a head at either end called the Amphisbaena and the blooming of coral reefs in the Red Sea. This target of a mission given by Polydectes of Seriphos produced a warrior whose name means "golden-armored," Chrysaor. The Libyan desert was home to this former devotee of Athena, a sibling of Stheno and Euryale who was punished for her affair with Poseidon. The Gray Sisters revealed the location of this female to a hero wearing Hermes' winged sandals. For 10 points, name this monster whose head was cut off by Perseus, a Gorgon with a petrifying gaze and snakes for hair.

ANSWER: Medusa

Result: 271 | BHSAT | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 51270

Question: This mythical hero carried a scroll full of scurrilous lies about himself, which was opened ten days into his exile in Lycia after he was falsely accused of raping Stheneboea. In Book Six of the Iliad, this man's grandson Glaucus decides not to fight Diomedes. On the advice of Polyeidos, this man slept in a temple of Athena and used a golden bridle to tame a companion. This human used a spear tipped with lead against his most fearsome adversary, and took a fall after a gadfly thwarted his attempt to fly to Olympus. For 10 points, name this ancient Greek hero who tamed the Pegasus before he slew the Chimera.

ANSWER: Bellerophontes

Result: 272 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 36819

Question: In one tradition, the inhabitants of this place each possessed a plant that provided one piece of fruit a day until one man's plant gave him two fruits one day and none the next, resulting in the first theft. That event occurred after the inhabitants of this place ate a creamy substance off the ground until they become mortal. This place is surrounded by seven rings of golden mountains and seven lakes, the last of which contains four worlds like islands. In another tradition, a wind god spends a year breaking off part of this place, resulting in the formation of an island; that island formed from this place becomes the site of a city later ruled by a (*) ten-headed demon. This place is encircled daily by the sun god Surya. The gods tied the naga Vasuki around this place during the Churning of the Ocean of Milk. For 10 points, name this axis mundi represented by Angkor Wat, a five-peaked mountain that holds the palace of Indra.

ANSWER: Mount Meru [accept Sumeru; accept Rirap Lhunpo; accept Czambu Ling or Dzambu Ling]

Result: 273 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 37250

Question: This region's grottoes are inhabited by red-eyed, priest-hating female spirits that seduce men at twilight near large stones. The last person to die in this region during the year takes over as the blind, cart-driving psychopomp Ankou. According to some myths from this region, a girl who strangles her lovers with a magical black mask is finally punished by being transformed into a morgen. It's not Cornwall, but Hoel is a mythical king of this region, whose folktales are preserved in the Barzaz Breiz. A kingdom in this region was founded by Conan Meriadoc, whose son (*) Gradlon fathered a girl who stole a key from a hunchback to please the monstrous Cado. That sinful enchantress, Dahut, brings about the sinking of this region's City of Ys. For 10 points, name this region in northwestern France.

ANSWER: Brittany [or Bretagne; or Breton mythology; prompt on "Celtic" mythology; prompt on "France" or other less specific answers; do not accept Britain]

Result: 274 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 37301

Question: In an African myth system, one of these creatures forms mineral-rich mountains with its feces and is ridden by the creator god. That creature is cooled by the ocean, eats iron bars supplied by red marine monkeys and causes earthquakes by moving. That example of these creatures is controlled by Nana-Buluku and inspired a female loa addressed in the Rada Rite, who enjoys white foods and is the consort of Damballah. Another example of these creatures turns the bones of those it swallows into stone; that version is Ngalyod, whose counterpart Yingarna is feminine like the aforementioned (*) Aido-Hwedo. These creatures live in permanent waterholes in the dry season and cause rain to replenish billabongs. They created law during the Dreamtime. For 10 points, name these creatures from Fon, Voodou and Aboriginal mythology, which are multicolored snakes.

ANSWER: Rainbow Serpents [accept Rainbow Snakes; accept specific Rainbow Serpents such as Aido- Hwedo and Ngalyod before mentioned; prompt on snakes or serpents or dragons or other less specific answers]

Result: 275 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 37310

Question: WARNING: DESCRIPTION ACCEPTABLE This object is served by three "harvest spirits" called "Bread," "Fields" and "Greens," as well as the "providers of food" and "earth openers." This object is attached to a finite rope that produces mysteries and an endless rope that represents infinite time. While guarding it, three figures are given the epithets "Speech," "Wide-Awake" and "Lord of Truth." The presence of a hanging carpet differentiates the two forms of this object, Mandjet and Mesektet. The snake (*) Mehen encircles this object, which is protected by a giant cat and by the god of magic, Heka. The Book of Caverns, the Book of Gates and Amduat are major sources on the ritual surrounding this object, which creates solar eclipses when engulfed by an evil serpent. For 10 points, name this vehicle attacked every night by Apep, which transports a celestial object with Ra at the helm.

ANSWER: solar barque [or Ra's barge before mentioned; accept any answer indicating a watercraft with a connection to Ra or the sun; accept Mandjet or Mesektet or variants such as Sektet or Matet before mentioned]

Result: 276 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 15 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 37346

Question: The Black Woodpecker was sacred to this god, who is mentioned alongside a group of deities in the Arval Hymn. A sheep, pig, and goat were sacrificed to this god in the Suovetaurilia, and the 24th day of his month was the date of the festival of the king's flight. A horse was sacrificed to this god on the 15th of October and its head fought over while its tail was hung in the Regia, which also housed a set of sacred (*) spears dedicated to this god. Augustus erected a temple to this god as "Avenger." The "leaping" priests or Salii of this god danced with the ancilla shields. This god was identified with Liber and paired with Venus at the Lectisternum. For ten points, name this member of the Capitoline Triad along with Jupiter and Quirinus, worshipped by the Flamen Martialis and identified with the Greek Ares.

ANSWER: Mars [prompt very grudgingly on "Ares" because in hindsight it's a bit mean to make people play "guess which name for these often-syncretized gods we want!"]

Result: 277 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 36845

Question: According to one interpretation, this figure created a peacock to demonstrate his nature after being born from his father's doubt about the efficacy of offerings. This figure was unconscious for 3,000 years before being spoken to by a demoness whom this figure made into a primal whore by kissing her on the forehead, thus causing women to menstruate. This figure's assault on the sky resulted in the death of a primordial bull from whose remains the world was repopulated. This figure fashioned (*) six evil beings to oppose six divinities that represent good qualities mortals should attempt to gain. After being protected by Sleep for 30 years, Gayomart succumbs to wounds inflicted by this being. This final defeat of this being will come on Frashokereti at the hands of a rival who created the Amesha Spentas, one of which upholds asha. For 10 points, name this adversary of Ahura Mazda in Zoroastrianism.

ANSWER: Angra Mainyu [or Ahriman]

Result: 278 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 36870

Question: Plato's Symposium relates how this figure's son Poros produced Eros after a drunken affair with Penia, the personification of poverty. Explanations for this deity's shape-changing include attempts to avoid conception or being challenged to morph into many different animals. Some sources state that this deity, not Gaia, was the one who tricked Kronos into vomiting up his children. Hesiod relates that this deity's unmatched wisdom is relied upon to help a certain (*) Olympian think. This deity's production of a helmet was so loud that Hephaestus had to hit another god in the head near the banks of the river Triton. Gaia warned that this figure would have a son more powerful than Zeus, so, when she became pregnant, he tricked her into turning into a fly and swallowed her. For 10 points, identify this Titaness, who can be considered the mother of Athena.

ANSWER: Metis

Result: 279 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 36880

Question: It's not part of an underworld, but a body of water located near part of this location is fed by a river that flows from the antlers of a stag. Unlike Gullinkambi, the golden rooster living in this location crows at dawn because light has defeated darkness. Lettfeti and Gulltopp are among those who spend much of each day at this place, which is generally held to be synonymous with Vidofnir's home (*) Mimameidr. The horses of the Aesir bear their masters here to council. The four deer Dainn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr, and Durathror regularly eat at this location. Some scholars posit that Hoddmimis holt, where Lif and Lifthrasir will hide to survive Ragnarok, is in fact just this entity. Its name means a certain god's "gallows," because to learn the runes, Odin hung himself from here for nine nights. For 10 points, identify this giant ash tree that connects the worlds of Norse myth.

ANSWER: Yggdrasil [accept Mimameidr before mention]

Result: 280 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 36886

Question: The festival date for one form of this deity is first attested in the Philocalian calendar. Virus Lupus was appointed to a college of pontiffs serving this deity by a ruler who constructed a massive temple to this deity on the Campus Agrippae following a victory over the Palmyrenes. In iconography, this deity is depicted along with a figure who was born from a rock while they engage in a banquet on top of the hide of a (*) slain bull. The feast of the winter solstice was associated with the symbolic birth of this god, who is depicted dining alongside Mithras after the tauroctony. This god's epithet means "unconquered" and in association with his cult, emperors wore a radiant crown. For 10 points, name this syncretic Roman sun god, who was given an official cult during the late Empire.

ANSWER: Sol Invictus [do NOT accept or prompt on "Sol Indiges"]

Result: 281 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 36905

Question: One servant of this god and his wife produces two-headed snakes that can enter women, causing diseases that can be cured by unraveling multicolored balls of yarn. The date of a festival to this god was moved to coincide with the feast day of St. John the Baptist. This god's wife cries silver tears and regulates women's menstrual cycles. This god was served by virgin girls who tended a sacred flame under a high priestess ritually married to this god, who may have been tied to a hitching post during the Raymi festival. He was never a ruler of humans, but this god's father has a name meaning "Sea (*) Foam" and destroys a race of disobedient giants in a flood. He's not a creator god, but this god's children Pacha Camaq and Manco Cápac are instructed to build him a temple after going into a cave and retrieving tapac-yauri, a golden staff. For 10 points, name this husband of Mama Quilla and son of Viracocha, the Incan sun god.

ANSWER: Inti

Result: 282 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 36935

Question: This figure gives a speech in which he notes his opponent's fear of going off to war and cites his father's participation in the quest for the Golden Fleece, as well as his grandfather's position as a judge of the dead. On another occasion this man despairingly prays to Zeus that he "Kill us all in the light of day" following the death of one of his comrades, then helps guard the men carrying that comrade's stripped corpse out of battle. He chooses to leave his tents, ignoring the advice of Calchas, resulting in an episode during which his son Eurysaces is hidden from him by (*) Tecmessa. Nightfall cuts off this man's duel with one enemy, to whom he gives a girdle and who gives him the sword he later uses to kill himself. He joins Phoenix and Odysseus on an embassy to Achilles, and his downfall comes after he loses the competition for the armor of Achilles. For ten points, name this hero of the Trojan War, a very strong son of Telamon.

ANSWER: Ajax the Great or Telamonian or son of Telamon or of Salamis [do NOT accept or prompt on Ajax the Lesser or Locrian or son of Oileus or of Locris]

Result: 283 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 37012

Question: The Skáldskaparmál notes that a kenning for earth is this deity's mother-in-law. It also states that, prior to his death, Hrungnir threatened to kill all the gods except Freya and this one. During an insulting contest, the gray-bearded ferryman Harbard tells his passenger that this deity is probably entertaining a lover. One suitor of this deity's daughter was tricked by this deity's spouse into answering questions outside until (*) dawn, at which point the sun turned him into stone; that prospective son-in-law was the dwarf Alviss. It is unknown who fathered this goddess's own son Ullr, but it was with her famous husband that she had Thrud. The Sons of Ivaldi crafted a piece of golden headwear for this goddess after Loki mischievously snuck into her bedroom as she slept and cut off her hair. For 10 points, identify this gold-haired Norse goddess, the wife of Thor.

ANSWER: Sif

Result: 284 | Cane Ridge Revival | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 37210

Question: Ampelos was reincarnated as a vine after being killed by one of these creatures. One of these creatures was murdered by the Titans so that Briareaus could burn its guts and defeat the gods; that one was a variant with a serpent's tail that was imprisoned by Styx. Dirce was killed by being bound to one of these animals by Amphion and Zetos. Another of these animals was captured by a man who sheltered with (*) Hecale, and had earlier been one of several creatures to inspire Eurystheus to jump into a pithos; that one was sacrificed by Theseus. One woman was given the gifts of Talos and a javelin that never missed after she was taken by a god in this form. Daedalus built a special wooden structure to allow Pasiphae to couple with one of these animals. For ten points, name this animal in whose form Zeus ravished Europa, whose head appeared on the Minotaur.

ANSWER: bulls

Result: 285 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 35988

Question: A four-eyed one of these creatures is killed with a sidhraka wood club wielded by a whore's son in order to drive evil spirits from the horse at the center of the Ashvamedha ritual. In Chinese myth, the god Zhang Xian is credited with keeping a "Heavenly" example of these creatures from eating the Moon and stealing children during eclipses. One of these creatures named Drudwyn, which appears in the tale of Culhwch and Olwen, can only be handled by the huntsman Mabon ap Modron. One of these creatures travels into the Himalayas on a journey during which Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhima, Draupadi, and Arjuna drop dead; upon reaching Mount Meru, Indra tells Yudhishthira to send it away, but he refuses and it transforms into the god Dharma. A crone forces a hero to break a geis by offering him the meat of this animal; that hero is Sétanta, who earned a name referring to this animal while visiting a blacksmith. For 10 points, name this type of animal whose place was taken for a time by Cúchulainn.

ANSWER: dog [or hound; accept obvious equivalents]

Result: 286 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 36166

Question: This culture believed that warriors who spent four years inhabiting its paradise were eventually transformed into butterflies that could go between heaven and earth. One story states that 1,600 gods in this myth system were born from a knife thrown from heaven to the earth. This culture's demiurge- like creator gave humanity the ability to doubt things and is a god of duality that resides in the thirteenth and most spectacular of its heavens. Its underworld was home to a mystic lizard that symbolized the earth and inhabits a place called "where the flags wave." Dead souls must journey for four years to reach this culture's lowest level of the underworld, which is the burial site for bones used by one of its gods to create humanity. Another of its afterlifes is ruled over by a namesake rain deity and is called Tlalocan. For 10 points, name this culture whose primary underworld is known as Mictlan.

ANSWER: Aztecs [prompt on Nahuatl mythology]

Result: 287 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 36191

Question: In The Argonautica, these figures turn to dust, but the weeping of Orpheus turns them into talking trees. Diodorus Siculus records that these deities were renowned for their beautiful sheep with fleece of gold. Pliny the Elder identifies the realm where they lived as Benghazi in Libya, from which King Juba supposedly brought the first orange to his kingdom. They were the children of either Atlas or Nyx, both of whom knew where they lived beyond the realm of Oceanos. Some stories state that Perseus retrieved winged sandals and a helmet of Hades from these goddesses, whose names are usually listed as Aigle, Erytheia, and Arethusa. These nymphs, who were responsible for the golden rays of sunsets, were assisted in one task by the hundred-headed dragon Ladon, who helped them watch over a tree. For 10 points, name these nymphs who guarded the golden apples that were retrieved by Heracles.

ANSWER: Hesperides

Result: 288 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 37730

Question: This being, which is often depicted as having the head of a dog and the claws of a lion, first materialized in China, where natives fought a war over its body parts. One legend states that this figure was an attendant of the Queen of Sheba that had a face of silver and a peacock's tale. In one story, this figure instructs a prince to bring her seven bull hides filled with water. In a different story, this figure is first summoned when a magician climbs a high peak and darkens the air by burning a feather in a brazier. Most stories relate how this figure possesses all of the world's wisdom and has thrice seen the destruction of the world. This figure leads a hero to a tamarisk tree where the hero uses a branch to forge an arrow that will defeat Esfandyar. A hoopoe leads 30 others to this creature's residence, only to discover that this creature is actually a reflection of their collective being. In a text by Ferdowsi, this being helps Zal with a C- section so that Rostam can be born. For 10 points, name this huge bird from Persian folklore.

ANSWER: Simorgh [or Simurgh; or Simourv] ["see-more"; accept reasonable phonetic pronunciations]

Result: 289 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 37738

Question: One book that describes this modern day country's lore contains an account of a one-armed people with three eyes who ride piebald horses and build amazing flying machines. This country's lore is also described in A Treatise on Research into Nature, which states that one of its heroes was transformed into a yellow bear after he was executed for stealing some ensorcelled soil from its sacred paradise. Another source on this country's lore titled The Garden of Stories contains an account of the "Foolish Old Man of 90 years" who tries to separate two mountains. A tree that grows pearls beside a lake of gems can be found in this country's mythic paradise named Kunlun, which is home to the Queen Mother of the West's immortality conferring peaches. This country's version of the great flood story features a miner named Yu the Great who stops it. For 10 points, name this country that is supposedly home to the paradise Shangri- La.

ANSWER: ANSWER: [People's Republic of] China [or PRC; or Zhongguo]

Result: 290 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 37761

Question: In Hellenistic Alexandria, an Egyptian god of this concept named Shai was syncretized with a snake god in depictions of the "good spirit" Agathos Daimon. A set of deities governing this concept in Slavic paganism included one with a giant, salivating bottom lip, another with a thumb an inch in diameter, and another with one huge foot. It's not childbirth, but in Baltic paganism, the linden tree was a symbol of Laima, a goddess of this concept who was sometimes syncretized with Daila. Using power over writing, the Babylonian god Nabu holds information about this concept. A Goliard poem describing this concept as "monstrous and empty" used the name of its Latin personification, Sors, and the Aeneid claims it is governed by the Parcae. Verdandi and Skuld can see examples of this concept near the Well of Urd. For 10 points, name this concept presided over by the crone-like Norns and by Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, who determine it by measuring and cutting threads.

ANSWER: fate [or the Fates; or destiny; or one's lifespan; accept any answer indicating the ordained end result of a person's life; accept thread of life or similar answers; accept answers such as fortune or luck or one's lot in life]

Result: 291 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 16 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 37812

Question: One member of this quartet neutralizes the invincibility of an enemy by having that enemy's uncle interrupt an offering to a God of thunder. Another member of this quartet has a mother who is advised by her wet nurse to avail a boon she received for saving her husband's life. These figures are conceived after a long period of infertility is ended when their father follows the advice of Vasistha. One of these figures marries Urmila, and in a different story, draws a perimeter that is exploited by the demon Maricha. One of these figures is revived from unconsciousness by Sushena using the herb Sanjivani. Upon the death of their father, one of these figures becomes a ruler, but instead chooses to have a pair of sandals placed on the throne, and two of them are exiled from Ayodhya. For 10 points, name these mythological siblings, including Bharata, Lakshmana, and a figure who marries Sita in a namesake epic written by Valmiki.

ANSWER: Rama and his brothers [accept Shatrughna, Lakhman, Rama, and Bharat in any order, until "Bharata"; or "sons of Dasharatha" ; or "sons of Kaikeyi, Kausalya, and Sumitra" ; accept "Ikshvaku siblings" or equivalents; do not accept answers including "Sita"]

Result: 292 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 18 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 37814

Question: This man once built a magnificent home that featured 13 royal thrones, the largest of which is inlaid with carbuncles and juts through the house's roof. In order to incite men to action, this man threatens to make the breasts of women beat together until they become loathsome and putrid. After being punched in the head with five fidchell pieces, this son of Carbad is killed by a white bull and a brown bull that are continuously fighting. This man, who is sometimes called "of the poison tongue," offers up honey- cakes, a cauldron of wine, and other delectable foods as a prize. This figure awards those prizes to a hero who beheads Cu Roi the day before Cu Roi comes back and beheads him. This trickster offers the Champion's Portion to Conall Cernach, Loegaire Buadach, and Cuchulainn at a festive occasion he initiates. For 10 points, name this trouble-maker from Irish mythology, whose feast titles a story in the Ulster Cycle.

ANSWER: Bricriu [or Briccrui; or Bricne; accept Bricrenn]

Result: 293 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 18 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 37851

Question: The philosopher Nicolaus of Damascus called these figures the baskanaoi to emphasize one of their weapons. In one adventure, a trio of these figures guide two chariots over the ocean to assist with Dionysus's invasion of India. Pindar records that, after these figures died, their legacy was carried on by the Heliades, and Zeus eventually rained down gold on them as a reward for their piety. One of their weapons was a mixture of water from the river Styx that they poured over other beings. They had the power to summon hail and rain, and they created the first sickle and Poseidon's trident. Like the dactyls, these figures were held to be the first to start the practice of metallurgy. These figures were often described as having evil eyes, hands that look like fish fins, and dog heads. These original inhabitants of the island of Rhodes were slain by Zeus because of their misuse of magical powers. For 10 points, name these malevolent sorcerers from Greek myth.

ANSWER: telchines

Result: 294 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 36013

Question: A woman in this text dreams that a man covered in goat skin tells her about the names of her children. Another dream sequence leads a character to identify "Huckster Heddin" in this text. It also contains an old woman's complaint that a pile of feed was not moved indoors and a boy seeing a firebrand-wielding horseman in the sky. After its title character's friend is given a dog that can tell friend from foe, that friend and Kolskegg slay a throng of attackers, leading them to be banished for three years. Early in this text, Thiostolf kills Thorwald after he abuses his wife Hallgerda. In its last section, a chant about the "Woof of War" is sung during a battle between Christians and pagans. Kari reconciles with Flosi after a shipwreck at the end of this text, whose title character dies when his enemies immolate him. This extended story is one of the first works of literature to use the term Althing. For 10 points, name this Icelandic saga about family feuds, titled for a beardless sage

ANSWER: Njal's Saga [or The Story of Burnt Njal; or Brennu-Njal's Saga; accept answers containing Njal or Burnt Njal such as The Saga of Njal]

Result: 295 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 36015

Question: 12.	 ANSWER: The Dionysiaca states that after the titans smeared chalk on their faces and murdered Zagreus, this kind of event happened. Before another one of these events, Cerambus was turned into a bird by nymphs. In Greek myth, the earliest one of these events is named after the autochthonous Attic king Ogyges. A different one of these events prompts a man to consult to the oracle of Themis beside the river Cephissus. According to Apollodorus, one of these events occurred after the Arcadian son of Pelasgus roasted Nyctimus in preparation for a meal. In a purely Roman story, Baucis and Philemon were turned into an oak and a linden tree while their greedy neighbors were subjected to one of these events. The hubris of Lycaon caused the largest ones of these events to take place, after which a couple survived by hiding out in a chest. For 10 points, name this kind of event that ended the Bronze Age in Greek mythology and was survived by Pyrrha and Deucalion.

ANSWER: flood [or deluge]

Result: 296 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 36028

Question: Antoninus Liberalis relates that the subjects of the Mariandynian king Hierax neglected to sacrifice to this god, who then turned Hierax into a vengeful bird of slaughter. Pausanias states that inside the Erechtheion, the altar used to sacrifice to Erechtheus was also sacred to this figure. An aspect of this god called "the Securer" or Asphalios was worshipped by the Spartans. In Thessaly, this deity was called Petraios because he ejaculated semen onto a rock that then turned into a sacred animal. In other stories, he turned an entire Scherian ship to stone, and killed Locrian Ajax by splitting the rock he was standing on. A man who promised to sacrifice to this god the first living thing he saw upon returning home from the Trojan War was a Cretan king named Idomeneus. Before the battle of Issus, legend has it that Alexander the Great sacrificed to this god by drowning a chariot. For 10 points, name this Greek god who could be appeased by sacrificing a horse.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 297 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 36049

Question: The Book of Taliesin states that this hero built a caer that is actually the starry belt of the Milky Way. This man is able to guess a rival's name after he recognizes sprigs of alder on the shield of his foe. A controversial section of The White Goddess asserts that the name of this man's horse is Yggdrasil, and that this Celtic god was actually Odin. His mischievous brother Amaethon stole a dog, a lapwing, and a roebuck from the king of the underworld. This hero is able to defeat Arawn after he makes several trees to come to life in the episode "The Battle of the Trees." He instigates a conflict by stealing the magical pigs of Pryderi; for that crime, he and his brother Gilfaethwy [ ] are turned into three separate animals for three different years. This sorcerer creates Blodeuwedd [ ] out of flowers. For 10 points, name this magician who figures prominently in the Math fab Mathonwy section of the Mabinogion.

ANSWER: Gwydion fab Don [or Gwyddien or Guidgen or Fidgen]

Result: 298 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 36068

Question: These structures may be covered in a metallic case with five faces on it, one of which is assumed to be pointing skyward. A hill that took the form of fire, gold, and diamonds contains one of these structures named the âtejoâ one, and is circum-ambulated by worshippers every full-moon night. The confusion of a Persian transliteration for one of these structures with that of a Semitic Goddess was a key factor in the destruction of that structure, according to a chronicle by Farruqi al-Sistani. Popular examples of these structures include a climate-change-afflicted stalagmite formation at Amarnath. Examples of these structures at Somnath and Ujjain are two of the 12 âradiantâ examples of these structures, which are sometimes co-located with temples commemorating the self-sacrifice of Sati. These structures are often found along with their more feminine counterparts that represent Shakti, called the yoni. For 10 points, name these phallic structures that represent the destroyer god of Hinduism.

ANSWER: Shiva linga [or lingam; accept temples dedicated to Shiva or equivalents until âradiantâ; prompt on âtemples to Shivaâ or equivalents after âradiantâ]

Result: 299 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 36069

Question: In a Norwegian narrative, one of these figures is revealed after a little boy beats mittens on a rock, when the rock jumps into an ocean and reveals itself to be one of these figures. In another narrative, these figures can transform into seals, or into smoke, so that they can swim through solid rock. In that narrative, the stoning of Slickstone-Eye causes the appearance of another one of these figures, and another of these figures starts to appear when the rambunctious Hrapp is interred into his doorway. Typically, these figures have a light blue or maroon fluorescent hue that permeates their bodies. In a book named after Laxdaela, the bones of a once-powerful sorceress are turned into one of these figures. In another story, it is implied that one of these revenants inhabits the barrow of Kar the Old because the barrow is ringed with fire and Grettir is afraid of it. For 10 points, name these undead monsters who figure into many Germanic sagas.

ANSWER: draugr [or draugar; prompt on â(Norse) undeadâ; prompt on ârevenant(s)â or âghostsâ or equivalents before ârevenantâ]

Result: 300 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 36090

Question: Pindarâs first Isthmian Ode is used as evidence that this man had a cult at Phylace. According to a poem by Antiphilus of Byzantium, very tall elm trees that grew atop this figureâs tomb withered when their branches literally saw the site of this figureâs death. Some sources state that this manâs name was Iolaos, though Homer calls Iolaos his father. In one story, a servant peeked through the crack of a door and saw this figureâs wife, a daughter of Acastus and Astydameia, embracing a bronze sculpture of this man. After Odysseus threw his shield onto the ground and jumped on it, this man completed the action that sealed his fate. According to Ovidâs Heroides, this hero received a letter instructing him to be the first to get off of the ship upon arriving at Troy. After heeding that advice, this figure only killed a few men before being slain by Hector, after which this figureâs brother, Podarces, joined the war. For 10 points, name this husband of Laodamia, the first hero to die in the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Protesilaus [accept Iolaos before âIolaosâ]

Result: 301 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 36118

Question: This man likens prayers to wrinkled daughters of Zeus who hobble after sin but never catch up to it. In Sophocles' Philoctetes, Neoptolemus falsely claims that this man is leading a Greek expedition to Lemnos. The Bibliotheca lists this man's sister as the mother of Ctesippus by Heracles. This man's relatives hold continuous watch over him for nine days and nights to prevent him from leaving home, but on the tenth night he escapes. This brother of Astydamia sleeps with his father's concubine Clytia at the urging of his mother, leading his father to blind him and curse him with infertility; he has his sight restored by Chiron and becomes king of Dolopia thanks to his benefactor Peleus. With Ajax the Greater and Odysseus, this son of Cleobule and Amyntor gives an impassioned speech exhorting his one-time pupil to resume fighting in the Trojan War. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who shares his name with an animal that arose from the ashes of its predecessor every 500 years.

ANSWER: Phoenix

Result: 302 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 36142

Question: Isidore of Seville claimed that this region is inhabited by sciopodes, which are humans who only have one foot. A story states that Apollonius of Tyana travelled to this region's capital and saved its inhabitants from a phantom satyr who had been terrorizing the city. Pliny the Elder's Natural History describes an animal from this region that has a deadly gaze, but has a head so incredibly heavy that it is unable to look at anything other than the ground. This region home to the catoblepas was also home to a warrior whose blood is used to create a huge river that annually reeks of human flesh when it flows. Poseidon sent a sea monster named Cetus who terrorized a ruler of this kingdom named Cepheus. A group of warriors that turned into birds were present at the funeral of a son of Eos who served as king of this region and was slain in the Trojan War. For 10 points, name this portion of Africa that was ruled by Memnon.

ANSWER: Ethiopia [or Aethiopis; prompt on "Africa" before "Africa"]

Result: 303 | Chicago Open | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 36156

Question: One story says that this figure saved a pack of dogs by putting them into a giant boot and sending that boot down south where the dogs became white people. This deity was sometimes syncretized with Apasinasee, and mammalian bones support the roof this deity's home, to whose floor is attached her bent leg. The realm of this goddess was home to a slowly spinning wheel of ice and a terrorizing dog, which was sometimes said to be her consort. While she was mortal, she spurned all suitors so that she could take care of her one-eyed, one-armed father, but she eventually left him for a good-looking man from the Land of Birds. This figure could be appeased by a shaman that combed her hair if he could visit her realm of Adlivun. After she had her fingers chopped off by her father Anguta as she tried to climb into his boat, the fingers became seals, whales, and other marine animals. For 10 points, name this Inuit sea goddess.

ANSWER: Sedna [accept Apasinasee before mention]

Result: 304 | College History Bowl | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 48882

Question: This incident involved items that had been constructed by Hipparchos and had the legend "don't deceive a friend" inscribed on them. This event happened during the Adonia festival, and it was initially blamed on Corinthians, who were seeking to protect one of their colonies. The man accused of being responsible for this incident was allowed to depart so that he could be tried in absentia for this action as well as for staging a parody of the (*) Eleusinian Mysteries. This event targeted items which overlooked doorways and marketplaces, and it involved obscuring faces and removing the erect phalluses which characterized its targets. This event happened on the eve of the departure of the Sicilian Expedition and was blamed, likely spuriously, on Alcibiades. For 10 points, identify this religious desecration which targeted Athenian statues of the messenger god.

ANSWER: mutilation of the Hermai [or Herma or Herms]

Result: 305 | DEES | 2014 | Round: William and Mary | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 54885

Question: An image of this deity was bound with branches from the lygos tree, under which she had been born, in a festival called the Toneia celebrated at her cult center of Samos. In one story, she is punished by being hung off a mountain by a golden chain with anvils hanging from her legs. This deity takes a yearly bath in the spring at Kanathos. After getting stuck to a magical throne he made, this deity threw Hephaestus off of Mount Olympus. This goddess was given the Homeric epithets "white-armed" and "cow-eyed". She also blinded Tiresias after he claimed that men enjoyed sex more than women, took away Echo's voice, and bedeviled her husband's many other lovers. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of marriage and women, the wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 306 | DEES | 2014 | Round: VCU A-Carleton A | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 54831

Question: This god stole a horse from King Sagar to prevent him from making a sacrifice that would make him emperor of the world. A common metaphor for interconnectedness among Buddhists is this god's jewel-studded net. This god agreed to make Hanuman immortal after smiting him when he tried to swallow the sun. Capturing this deity in battle earned Meghanada a new name. This god, who released Ushas from the cave of Vala, lived on Mount Meru. In another story, he passed through ninety-nine fortresses while on the way to recover all the water in the world. This deity, who rides a white elephant named Airavata, killed the demon Vritra with his vajra, a lightning bolt that has the power to make rain. For 10 points, name this Vedic god whose role as chief of the Devas was later usurped by the gods of the Trimurti.

ANSWER: Indra [or Sakra]

Result: 307 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Chicago A | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 53845

Question: In some places, this figure was called "matavaru" to distinguish him from his similarly-named brothers, none of whom have eight eyes. In another tradition, this character was born prematurely, so his mother wrapped him in her hair and threw him into the sea; later, he took the form of a wood pigeon to follow her to the underworld. In another story, this figure fashions a cloth doll to look like him in a boat, so that he can hide on an island and discover the secrets of fire-making. This character fought Tuna to protect his new wife Hina and forced the sun to slow down by beating it with the same jawbone that he also used to fish up the North Island of New Zealand. For 10 points, identify this Polynesian trickster hero who lends his name to a Hawaiian island.

ANSWER: Maui [or Maui-tikitiki; or Ti'iti'i]

Result: 308 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Colulmbia A | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 53874

Question: In one story, a sacrifice to this deity was interrupted by Callipolis, whose father Alcathous killed him for impiety. Earlier, this god had helped Alcathous construct the walls of Megara. This god caused Clytia to wither and die after she revealed an affair between this god and Leucothea. Xuthus adopted a son that this god fathered with Creusa, named Ion. This god got the Fates drunk as a favor for Admetus, whom this god had to serve as punishment for killing the Cyclopes, which he had done as revenge for Zeus's killing of his son Asclepius. This slayer of Python founded the oracle of Delphi, killed the seven sons of Niobe, and tricked his sister into killing Orion with her bow. For 10 points, name this Greek god of light and music, the twin brother of Artemis.

ANSWER: Apollo [or Apollon]

Result: 309 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Columbia B | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 53893

Question: In Japanese folklore, a yokai called a futakuchi-onna uses this part of her body to feed her voracious second mouth. In Greek myth, Comaetho destroyed the magical version of this body part given to her father Pterelaus by Poseidon. The city of Megara was protected from invasion by its king's own example of a magical version of this body part. That king, who later transformed into a sea eagle and attacked his daughter Scylla after she betrayed him to King Minos, was named Nisus, who had a purple example of this body part. In Norse myth, Thor forced Loki to have Brokk and Sindri make a replacement version of this body part for Sif out of finely-wrought gold. For 10 points, name this body part which, for Stheno, Euryale, and Medusa, was made of snakes.

ANSWER: the hair [or "a lock of hair" or "a head of hair" or equivalents]

Result: 310 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Editors 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 53910

Question: This deity owned a dog whose hide or mouth could produce an infinite amount of wine. His refusal to loan out his water-walking horse, itself a loan, forced him to lend his boat Wave-Sweeper in its place. This deity's foster mother died after clearing a country's land for agriculture, after which he founded the Tailteann games in her honor. He ordered three men to gather him a series of weapons, but then refused to heal them of their wounds in revenge for their murder of his father Cian. After winning a flagstone-throwing contest against Ogma, he shot the evil eye out of Balor's head at the second battle of Magh Tuireadh, thus avenging his predecessor Nuada. According to the Ulster Cycle, he was the true father of Cuchulainn. For 10 points, name this Celtic god who defeated the Fomorians as the champion of the Tuatha de Danaan.

ANSWER: Lugh [or Lu; or Lugus; or even Lleu Llaw Gyffes]

Result: 311 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Editors 2 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 54156

Question: A temple to this deity was built at the foot of Jebel Barkal after the conquering of Kush, who absorbed him as their national deity. The oasis at Siwa was home to an oracle of this deity, who was worshipped as a deity of air and invisibility alongside Nun, Kuk, and Huh, with whom he made up the male half of the Ogdoad. The high priests of this deity exerted much power at a city that contained the temple of Karnak, where this god was worshipped as the father of Khonsu with his consort Mut. After Akhenaten's death, his son changed his name to one meaning "the living image of" this god. For 10 points, identify this ram-headed chief deity of the Theban Triad, who later came to be identified with Ra, to whose name his was attached.

ANSWER: Amun-Ra [do not accept "Atem", "Aten", or "Ra" by itself; prompt on "Tutankhamun" after "Akhenaten" is read]

Result: 312 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Editors 3 + UCSD | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 54656

Question: It's not weather or storms, but a god of this domain is described in the Rig Veda as appearing from the mouth of Virat Purusha. In a story from the Popol Vuh, Balam-Quitzé and Balam-Acab were forced to beg for assistance from Tohil, the god of this domain. A god of this domain executed the xirang thief Gun on Feather Mountain and foiled an attempt to take control of heaven led by his son Gong Gong. The Japanese god of this domain was beheaded and cut into eight pieces after his birth caused the death of his mother Izanami. Zhurong and Kagu-tsuchi are gods of this domain, as is a husband of Svaha who loves using his seven tongues to lick up sacrificial ghee. For 10 points, Agni is the Hindu deity of what domain, centering on a substance that was stolen from the gods by Prometheus?

ANSWER: fire [or synonyms like flames]

Result: 313 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Maryland A | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 54673

Question: In some traditions, this god cursed his grandson Cipitio with eternal youth. The festival of Atemoztli was dedicated to this god, as was a festival in which weaving sticks were used to ritually "kill" amaranth-dough images of him. More permanent figures of this god were typically carved out of jadeite. This god's main temple was on a namesake mountain, and he was also worshipped alongside Huitzilopochtli at the Templo Mayor. He married the jade-skirted Chalchiuhtlicue after his first wife Xochiquetzal was stolen by Tezcatlipoca. A world of eternal abundance ruled by this god was the destination of deformed people, disease victims, child sacrifices, and those who drowned. For 10 points, name this Aztec god of thunder and rain.

ANSWER: Tlaloc

Result: 314 | DEES | 2014 | Round: McGill + Penn B | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 54694

Question: This character arranged a marriage between a daughter of Alector and his own illegitimate son Megapenthes. A pivotal event in this man's life occurred during his attendance at the funeral of his grandfather Catreus. This man's only daughter gave birth to Tisamenus after marrying Orestes. After the death of his steersman Canobus, this man received advice from the nymph Eidothea on the island of Pharos that allowed him to capture Proteus. This father of Hermione was shot by Pandarus after soundly defeating Paris in a duel. During the sack of Troy, he killed Deiphobus but spared Deiphobus's wife due to her beauty, taking her back to Sparta with him. For 10 points, name this king, the son of Atreus, brother of Agamemnon, and husband of Helen.

ANSWER: Menelaus

Result: 315 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Michigan A | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 54721

Question: This man is given a shield by King Evelake which has a cross drawn in blood on it. The sister of one of this man's companions takes him to a ship which only true believers can board, where he finds a sword and crown. He becomes king of the city of Sarras after undertaking a task given to him by Pelles and Eliazar. This man is given the ability to die at the moment he chooses, and ascends to heaven after meeting Joseph of Arimathea. This man is conceived when Elaine of Corbenic tricks his father into thinking she is Guinevere. He's not Percival, but he manages to survive sitting in the Siege Perilous. For 10 points, name this son of Lancelot whose extraordinary purity allows him to achieve the Grail.

ANSWER: Sir Galahad [or Galath; or Galeas; or Gwalchavad]

Result: 316 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Penn A | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 54727

Question: A creature that can take this non-human form has skin that turns adhesive when it senses water. The companion of an ox-headed demonic guardian of the underworld in Chinese mythology has the face of one of these creatures. Two of these creatures in Celtic mythology were named Liath Macha and Dub Sainglend. The each-uisge could take this animal form, and was considered more dangerous than the similar Scottish kelpie. In Greek mythology, a talking one of these animals was named Arion, and Perseus gave Achilles a pair of immortal ones named Balius and Xanthus. Another one of these animals was the brother of Chrysaor who helped Bellerophon in his defeat of the Chimera and his attempt to fly up Mount Olympus. For 10 points, name this animal, mythological examples of which include the winged Pegasus.

ANSWER: horses [or winged horses]

Result: 317 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Toronto-Waterloo-McMaster A | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 54755

Question: A king of this place claims to make a goddess "shriek like a duckling" in a story that also tells of a sorceress from this place defeating a magician in a fish spawn-triggered animal-summoning contest. Another king of this place meets Zangara in the form of a bull while lying ill in a cave, after which he is granted super-speed that allows him to take part in the siege of Aratta after helping out the Anzu bird. In another story, the mes are brought to this city by its tutelary deity, Inanna. The most famous king of this city goes to the bottom of the sea to retrieve an immortality-granting plant on the advice of Utnapishtim after killing Humbaba with the help of his friend Enkidu. For 10 points, name this Sumerian city ruled by Enmerkar, Lugalbanda, and Gilgamesh.

ANSWER: Uruk [or Unug-Kulaba; or Erech; or Eresh; do not accept "Ur"]

Result: 318 | DEES | 2014 | Round: Virginia B | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 54845

Question: Richard Payne Knight's first book was about the Worship of this deity, who was said to be born in the city of Lampsacus on the Hellespont. A wall painting in the House of the Vettii in Pompeii depicts this god weighing various fruits against one of his own possessions. In a pair of stories from Ovid's Fasti, the braying of a donkey belonging to Silenus foiled this god's attempt to rape either the nymph Lotis or Vesta. This son of Dionysus and Aphrodite served as a patron god for merchant sailors, while red-painted statues of him were placed in fields to serve as simultaneous scarecrows and fertility emblems. For 10 points, name this Greco-Roman deity with a gigantic, permanently-erect phallus, who lends his name to a similar medical disorder.

ANSWER: Priapus

Result: 319 | DEES | 2014 | Round: WUSTL | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 54863

Question: This man is the father of a figure who is venerated with statues of his severed head, which he cut off in sacrifice to a terrible god. Iravan is this man's son with Ulupi, a princess whom he meets on a pilgrimage of repentance. This man vows to kill himself if he cannot get revenge before sunset, so an artificial solar eclipse is used to trick an enemy out of hiding. He reluctantly kills an enemy whose wheel gets stuck in mud, and later learns that that man was his brother. This killer of Jayadratha and Karna is initially reluctant to fight his relatives on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, and is told by a god that "I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds." This member of the Pandavas appears in a dialog with his charioteer Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita. For 10 points, name this warrior from the Mahabharata.

ANSWER: Arjuna

Result: 320 | DEES | 2014 | Round: WUSTL | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 54871

Question: Vase paintings of this non-Heracles character's death often involve the daimon Lyssa. This man's sister once lived in the cave where Jason and Medea later married. Pausanias describes a rock in Orchomenos on which this man often rested. Like his father, this man was a student of Chiron, who erected a statue of him after his death. During a trip through the valley of Gargaphia, this brother of Macris interrupted the hairdressing efforts of Crocale and was attacked by a group led by the black-footed Melampus. This son of Aristaeus and Autonoë died after being splashed with water that turned him into a stag. For 10 points, name this huntsman who was torn apart by his own dogs after witnessing Artemis bathing.

ANSWER: Actaeon

Result: 321 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 58250

Question: Two of this mythological figure's namesake animals appear on the Scorpion Macehead found at Nekhen. The Greeks associated this deity with Typhon, and he was often depicted in the front of Ra's boat fighting the serpent Apep. In contrast to his siblings' standard births, this deity ripped himself from the womb of his mother, Nut [noot]. One of this god's rivals tricked him into ingesting his semen by spreading it on lettuce that this deity ate. The oxyrhynchus fish was associated with him, as one of them ate the penis of his brother, whom this god cut into pieces. FTP name this husband of Nephthys and brother and enemy of Osiris.

ANSWER: Set

Result: 322 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 58442

Question: This figure was weakened before his last battle with Lugaid after he broke an oath not to eat dog meat in order not to refuse the hospitality of an old woman. After being invited to a feast by Conchobar, this figure killed a blacksmith's guard dog and took a new name when he agreed to guard the smith's house himself. This figure answered to Sétanta in his youth. FTP, name this wielder of the spear Gae Bolg, an Irish hero from The Cattle Raid of Cooley who is also known as the "Hound of Ulster."

ANSWER: Cú Chulainn (accept Sétanta before mentioned)

Result: 323 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 58459

Question: This figure is depicted subduing the "nine bows" on the seal of many tombs in the Valley of the Kings. One of his roles was "opener of Northern Roads." In the Pyramid Texts this figure is associated with the Eye of Horus, and in his primary role he abandons the guilty to the beast Ammit. His daughter Kabechet helps him in a process that utilizes canopic jars. For ten points, name this protector of the dead and expert at mummification, a jackal-headed Egyptian god.

ANSWER: Anubis

Result: 324 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 58471

Question: In one story, this deity was wounded by a severed head, which created an idiom for sword meaning the "Head of [this god]." This deity spent three nights sleeping between husbands and their wives to create the three classes of man while traveling the world in the form of Rig. This deity retrieved the stolen Brisingamen by transforming into a seal and defeating its thief in battle. He wields the sword Hofund and rides the horse Gulltopper. This god, who was raised by nine mothers, will kill and be killed by Loki at Ragnarok. This owner of the Gjallarhorn has the ability to hear grass grow. For 10 points, name this Norse god who guards Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdallr

Result: 325 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 58273

Question: Gems and precious metals grown on trees on one of these locations in Chinese Mythology is called Penglai. The Cambodian temple complex Angkor Wat is modeled on one of these locations, which in Hinduism was the home of the Trimurti, called Meru. The Oracle of Delphi was housed on one of these locations; another was the home of the Muses in Greek myth. Ida and Parnassus are, FTP, what landforms, the most famous of which is the home of the Greek gods, Olympus?

ANSWER: mountains

Result: 326 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 58304

Question: In a humbling episode told by the Wabanaki people, this type of person defeats the mighty hero Glooskap with his gigantic lung power. Arkas was in this state of being when he was rescued by Hermes after Artemis killed Callisto, who had been turned into a bear. Dionysus was in this form when he was taken from Zeus's thigh and given to Ino and Athamas. Oedipus was in this state of being when he was left exposed on Mount Kithairon by his father, Laius. FTP, Uranus and Cronus both swallowed their children when they were in what stage of human development?

ANSWER: baby (accept obvious synonyms like "infant")

Result: 327 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 58308

Question: This mythological figure was married to the sister of Circe, and because of his infidelities, his spouse cursed him to ejaculate spiders and scorpions; he gifted the perfect hunting dog Laelaps to the woman who cured his curse and was his lover, Procris. He found a man on whom he wanted revenge by getting him to string a spiral seashell, after which he was scalded to death in a bath. He was punished by Poseidon for keeping a sacred white bull by having his wife, Pasiphae, cursed to lust after that bull. FTP what king had Daedalus build the labyrinth to house the Minotaur and is the namesake of the ancient civilization on Crete?

ANSWER: Minos

Result: 328 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 58334

Question: The Ancilia were 12 of these items sacred to the Romans, kept in the Temple of Mars. The one owned by Ajax the Lesser was created by Tikios from seven layers of ox hide. One Norse myth says that one of these items called Svalinn kept the earth from being burned by the sun. A set of gifts given to a Greek hero included Hades' helmet of darkness, winged sandals given by Hermes, and one of these items polished to allow its holder to see Medusa in it. FTP what defensive item was used as a mirror by Perseus and likely included the Aegis of Zeus and Athena?

ANSWER: shield

Result: 329 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 58356

Question: This deity fathered four daughters on one of his wife's attendants, Aglaea. This deity's attempted rape of Athena led to the inadvertent birth of Erichthonius. Greeks were fond of an image of this deity drunkenly slung on the back of a donkey after Dionysus inebriated him and brought him to Olympus to free Hera from a throne this deity devised for her. This god created an invisible snare net that he used to capture his wife in flagrante with Ares. Lame due to his being hurled to earth from Olympus at birth, FTP name this Greek god of the forge.

ANSWER: Hephaestus

Result: 330 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 58379

Question: In one Homeric hymn, this deity is described with the epithet "Delphinius," suggesting his affinity with one of his sacred animals, the dolphin. This deity's offspring include Aristaeus, god of husbandry and bee-keeping, and Asclepius, god of healing. He was syncretized with another deity of a certain celestial body, earning him the titles "Phoebus" and "Helios." With his sister, he killed the children of Niobe for daring to insult their mother. Son of Zeus and Leto, FTP, who is this Olympian patron of the arts and the sun, twin brother of Artemis?

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 331 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 58398

Question: The Hindu deity Kartikeya uses one of these creatures as his mount, and in Hindu iconography this creature is often depicted killing a serpent. The chief angel of the Yazidi people, Melek Taus, is one of these birds. Krishna wears the feather of this bird in his headband. Two of these birds pulled the chariot of the Greek goddess of marriage, and one Greek story states this bird's plumage was originally decorated by the 100 eyes from the head of Argus Panoptes. FTP what blue bird was sacred to Hera?

ANSWER: : peacock (accept "peafowl")

Result: 332 | Delta Burke | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 58412

Question: In the Chinese classic Romance of the Three Kingdoms, Guan Yu has a famous one of these called "Green Dragon Crescent." Japanese storm god Susanoo named the one he found in the body of Yamata no Orochi "Kusanagi," or "Grass Cutter." Roland used one called Durendal, and after breaking his own, Beowulf borrows one of these from Unferth--the second one is called Hrunting. FTP, what type of weapon was given to King Arthur by the Lady of the Lake and was called Excalibur?

ANSWER: sword

Result: 333 | ICCS | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 38555

Question: One of these items belonging to Shiva is broken by Rama, winning him the right to marry Sita. Varuna gives a chariot and one of these items called Gandiva to Arjuna to use during the Kurukshetra War. One of these made of sugarcane and honeybees is owned by Kama. Penelope devises a test involving twelve axes and one of these items; after passing that test, Odysseus uses that item to kill many of her other suitors. This is the primary weapon of Philoctetes, Artemis, and Apollo. For 10 points, name these weapons, with which Cupid inspires love by firing arrows.

ANSWER: bows and arrows [prompt on "arrow(s)" until read]

Result: 334 | ICCS | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 38905

Question: One of these objects, along with the Yasakani no Magatama, was hung from a tree in order to lure Amaterasu out of a cave and was known as the "eight hand" one. After losing a foot to the monster Cipactli, Tezcatlipoca replaced the foot with one of these items that emitted smoke and was made of obsidian. In order to approach and slay Medusa, Perseus used his shield as one of these items. In a fairy tale, one of these items was asked the question "Who's the fairest of them all?" by the wicked stepmother of Snow White. For 10 points, name these reflective objects.

ANSWER: magic mirrors [or looking glasses; or other logical equivalents]

Result: 335 | ICCS | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 38582

Question: Pausanias claims that this group originally consisted of three figures, including Aoide and Melete. Thamyris is blinded after losing a contest to these figures, who also judge the contest that results in Apollo's flaying of Marsyas. Depending on the source, they live on either Mount Helicon or Mount Parnassus. Among these children of Zeus and Mnemosyne are Terpsichore and Urania, who represent dance and astronomy. For 10 points, Clio and Calliope are members of which group of nine Greek goddesses of science, art, and literature?

ANSWER: the Muses [or Mousai]

Result: 336 | ICCS | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 38612

Question: One god in this myth system, who is often depicted as a dead woman with a rope around her neck, conducts suicides to the underworld. Many deities in this people's myth system have been given somewhat generic names like "Howler Monkey God" and "God K," the latter of whom is the personification of the axe of their rain god, Chaac. One Death and Seven Death are lords of this people's underworld, Xibalba. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican people whose myths, including that of the Hero Twins Hunahpu and Xbalanque, are collected in the Popol Vuh.

ANSWER: Mayans [or Mayan mythology; or K'iche' Mayan mythology]

Result: 337 | ICCS | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 38777

Question: This deity allows Cleobis and Biton to die in their sleep, in response to their mother Cydippe's prayer for "the best gift a god can give a mortal." Sidero is murdered by Pelias atop an altar to this deity, who kills all of Lamia's children and delays Eileithyia in order to prevent Leto from giving birth. Her Homeric epithet is "boôpis," or "cow-eyed." She gives Echo her namesake curse, employs Argus Panoptes to guard Io, and makes her hated stepson complete twelve labors for Eurystheus. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess, the mother of Ares and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera [or Here; accept Juno until "Greek" is read]

Result: 338 | ICCS | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 38798

Question: In the Kalevala, Ilmarinen's first task in Pohjola is to plow a field infested with these animals. A creator deity who inhabits water holes is a "rainbow" type of this animal in Australian Aboriginal myth. In Hindu myth, nagas take the form of this animal. In Greek myth, Asclepius learns healing secrets from one of these animals. Two of these symmetrically appear on Hermes's staff, the caduceus, and the Ouroboros is one that eats its own tail. For 10 points, name these animals which, according to another legend, were driven out of Ireland by Saint Patrick.

ANSWER: snakes [or serpents]

Result: 339 | ICCS | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 38820

Question: According to Plutarch, this man died on the island of Skyros after being thrown off a cliff by Lycomedes. He is sheltered from a storm by Hecale while on his way to capture the Marathonian Bull. This man's failure to switch his black sails for white ones causes his father's suicide. He is given a sword and a ball of thread by Ariadne, who he later abandons on Naxos. He kills bandits including Procrustes while traveling to Athens, after finding his father Aegeus's sword and sandals under a rock. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who slays the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 340 | ICCS | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 38847

Question: Tacitus controversially asserted that the Suebi worshipped this goddess, who was the subject of a Roman festival named for her "Navigium." In one story, she entices a snake to bite another deity in order to learn his secret name. This goddess, who is associated with the tyet symbol, travels to Byblos in order to find a box sealed within a tree. This goddess finds only thirteen of the fourteen scattered pieces of her husband's body after it is chopped up by Set. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the mother of Horus and wife of Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis [or Aset]

Result: 341 | ICCS | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 38867

Question: This deity was raised on Rhodes by Capheira and the Telchines. After raping a Lapith woman named Caenis, this god transformed her into the male warrior Caeneus. This god found Demeter hiding in a herd of mares and fathered the talking horse Arion with her. Iphimedia's affair with this god resulted in the birth of Otus and Ephialtes. Odysseus earned this god's enmity by killing Polyphemus, this god's son. This god is also the father of the merman Triton. For 10 points, name this brother of Hades and Zeus, the Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon [accept Neptune until "Greek" is read]

Result: 342 | ICCS | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 38889

Question: This god used a staff to prevent a rising chair from crushing him against the roof of a dwelling and then used the chair to crush Gjalp and Greip, the daughters of Geirrod. In another story, this god lost a wrestling match against the old woman Elli and failed to drain a drinking horn connected to the sea. His sons, Modi and Magni, were not the children of his golden-haired wife Sif. This god was deceived by Utgard-Loki into attempting to lift a cat that is actually his mortal enemy, the Midgard Serpent. For 10 points, name this wielder of Mjölnir who was the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [or Donar; or Thunar]

Result: 343 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 35661

Question: In the guise of Grimnir, this god received a drink from Agnar after being tortured for eight days by King Geirroth. This god owns a hall called Gladsheim and can see the entire world from his throne of Hlidskjalf. His son Vidarr avenges his death with a leather shoe, and since he drinks nothing but wine and mead, this god feeds all his food to (*) Geri and Freki. He gained knowledge about runes after hanging from Yggdrasil for nine days and sought wisdom by paying an eye to drink from the Well of Mimir. This rider of the eight-legged horse Sleipnir is the husband of Frigga and leader of the Aesir. For ten points, name this "Allfather," the chief Norse god.

ANSWER: Odin [accept Woden or Wodinaz]

Result: 344 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 35847

Question: According to the myths of the Navajo and Pueblo, the world was created by an old woman who took the form of this creature. In the myth of the Lakota, dreamcatchers were created by a god in the shape of this animal named Iktomi. Another one of these creatures was a son of Asase Ya who brought back a leopard, snake, dwarf, and hornet before his father Nyame gave him all the (*) stories in the world. Athena turned a woman into one of these animals after she depicted the affairs of the gods in her weaving. In West African folklore, the trickster god Anansi was one of these creatures. For ten points, name this eight-legged animal that Arachne was turned into.

ANSWER: spiders

Result: 345 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 35865

Question: This man received shelter after he embraced the legs of Queen Arete of Scheria, the wife of King Alcinous. Eurymachus attempted to hit this man with a chair after he defeated the beggar Irus. His men were killed after they ate the cattle of Helios, and the rest of his ships had earlier been destroyed by the (*) Laestrygonians. After this man arrived at Aeaea, Hermes gave him moly to help him ward off the magic of the witch Circe. This man was held captive by Calypso before coming home and killing his wife's 108 suitors with his son Telemachus. For ten points, name this king of Ithaca who spent ten years trying to return to his wife Penelope after the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Odysseus [accept Ulysses]

Result: 346 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 35898

Question: After his half-brother Androgeus was killed in Athens, this figure received a yearly tribute. This creature was sometimes known as Asterion due to his connection with Aldebaran, and Aegeus committed suicide after this figure was slain because its killer forgot to put up (*) white sails after accomplishing the feat. Daedalus built a wooden contraption that allowed Pasiphae to conceive this creature after Minos refused to sacrifice a white bull. Ariadne helped a hero kill this monster by giving him a ball of string that allowed him to navigate the Labyrinth. For ten points, name this half-bull, half-man creature that was killed by Theseus.

ANSWER: Minotaur [accept Asterion before mentioned]

Result: 347 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 35908

Question: This deity owns the fourth Ratna, which is believed to be the most valuable stone. Bheeshma recites all of this god's thousand names, and Antaryami and Vibhava are among the five different forms this deity takes. He kills Hiranyaksha in the form of a boar. This deity is depicted holding a (*) lotus flower and conch shell, and he rides the bird Garuda. This god's ninth incarnation is considered to be either Balarama or the Buddha. His tenth incarnation, called Kalki, will destroy the world. Lord Rama and Krishna are avatars of, for ten points, what preserver god and wife of Lakshmi who composes the Hindu trimurti along with Brahma and Shiva?

ANSWER: Vishnu [accept Narayana and Hari]

Result: 348 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 35925

Question: One of these locations is the dominion of Supay and is named Uku Pacha. In Buddhism, Avici is a cube-shaped one of these that is part of Naraka. In Finnish mythology, an old woman used a copper rake to recover the body of a person who drowned while pursuing a swan in one of these places named (*) Tuonela. Before entering one named Irkalla, Ishtar had to remove one article of clothing for each of the seven gates that led to it. The Asphodel Fields are a part of another one of these places, which also contains the Isles of the Blessed and Elysium. For ten points, name these places where the spirits of the dead go, one example of which is ruled by Hades.

ANSWER: underworlds [accept hells; accept netherworlds or equivalents]

Result: 349 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 35935

Question: This object originated from a son of Theophane and Poseidon, who saved the children of Athamas and Nephele. The person who seized this object killed Absyrtus to expedite his return home. This object was made after Helle fell into the sea and Phrixus arrived on the island of Colchis, where he presented it to its king Aeetes. (*) Pelias claimed that he would give up the throne of Iolcus if his one-sandaled nephew brought this object back. That nephew had to yoke brazen bulls and sow dragon's teeth before acquiring this object and escaping with his lover Medea. For ten points, name this object, made from the skin of a ram that was sought by Jason and the Argonauts.

ANSWER: Golden Fleece

Result: 350 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 35943

Question: This object originated from a son of Theophane and Poseidon, who saved the children of Athamas and Nephele. The person who seized this object killed Absyrtus to expedite his return home. This object was made after Helle fell into the sea and Phrixus arrived on the island of Colchis, where he presented it to its king Aeetes. (*) Pelias claimed that he would give up the throne of Iolcus if his one-sandaled nephew brought this object back. That nephew had to yoke brazen bulls and sow dragon's teeth before acquiring this object and escaping with his lover Medea. For ten points, name this object, made from the skin of a ram that was sought by Jason and the Argonauts.

ANSWER: Golden Fleece

Result: 351 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 15 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 35971

Question: This son of King Ban was known as the White Knight until he defeated the cowardly Copper Knight and lifted a stone slab to find his true name, after which Dolorous Guard became his castle Joyous Guard. This man killed Gaheris and Gareth as he rescued a lover from burning at the stake, which later earned him the enmity of their brother (*) Gawain. This man was raised by the Lady of the Lake, and his affair with Elaine of Corbenic produced the knight who eventually found the Holy Grail, Sir Galahad. For ten points, name this knight of the Round Table who had an affair with Arthur's wife Guinevere.

ANSWER: Lancelot

Result: 352 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 35679

Question: This man killed Agenor and his army of two hundred when they attempted to stop his wedding. He was raised by the fisherman Dictys, whom he made ruler of the island of Seriphus. While participating in some funeral games, this man accidentally struck and killed his grandfather Acrisius with a discus. (*) Polydectes, in an attempt to marry his mother Danae, sent this man on a quest, during which he received a magic wallet from Hermes, a helm of invisibility from Hades, and a reflective shield from Athena. After killing a mortal sister of Stheno and Euryale, this man married the princess Andromeda. For ten points, name this Greek hero who slew the Gorgon Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 353 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 35688

Question: The Teumessian Fox was turned into stone after being caught in a paradox with one of these animals, which was given to Procris by Minos. Quetzalcoatl's twin brother Xolotl was often depicted as a psychopomp with the head of this animal. Circe turned Scylla into a monster with six of this animal's heads protruding from her waist, and Odysseus was first recognized by one named (*) Argos upon his return to Ithaca. In Norse mythology, Tyr will be killed by one of these animals named Garm at Ragnarok. For ten points, name these animals, a three-headed one of which guarded Hades and was named Cerberus.

ANSWER: dogs [do not accept or prompt on "wolf"]

Result: 354 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 35697

Question: The Roman equivalent of this Greek god fathered a giant named Cacus who stole the Cattle of Geryon from Heracles. He was raised by Eurynome and Thetis on Lemnos, and fathered a child with Gaia named Erichthonius after his attempted rape of Athena. Self-moving (*) tripods assist this god, who once gave his mother a throne that she could not get out of. This god used a fine metal net to catch his wife in the middle of an affair with Ares. He fell for a day after he was thrown out of Mount Olympus by his mother Hera. For ten points, name this lame husband of Aphrodite and Greek god of fire, smithing, and metalworking.

ANSWER: Hephaestus [or Hephaistos; do not accept or prompt on "Vulcan"]

Result: 355 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 35729

Question: This man has dreams about a falling mountain and attacking bulls, and another of his dreams about a meteor foreshadows the arrival of a companion. This figure crosses Mount Mashu by passing two scorpion men and loses a bet after a woman bakes loaves of bread to show that this man could not stay awake for seven nights. A snake stole an (*) immortality-giving plant that this man sought after meeting the flood survivor Utnapishtim. This man was two-thirds god, and after he rejected Ishtar's advances and helped kill the Bull of Heaven, his friend Enkidu was killed. For ten points, identify this Hero King of Uruk, who names an epic poem in Babylonian mythology.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh [accept Bilgamesh]

Result: 356 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 35748

Question: These beings pounded the invulnerable warrior Caeneus into the ground when they attacked Pirithous at his wedding. A particularly intelligent one of these creatures was the son of Cronus and Philyra, though most were the children of Ixion and Nephele. One named Pholus gave Heracles a jar of wine, while another told Deianeira to give Heracles a shirt (*) poisoned with his blood and was named Nessus. A wise and immortal one of these creatures who gave up his immortality and took the place of Prometheus was named Chiron. For ten points, name these creatures which were half horse and half man.

ANSWER: centaurs

Result: 357 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 35763

Question: This god was once retrieved from a pillar in a palace at Byblos that later represented this god's spine as the Djed pillar. During the Ptolemaic period, this god was replaced with a Greco-Egyptian hybrid called Serapis. This ruler of Duat wore the Atef crown and was commonly depicted as a (*) green-skinned mummy holding a flail and crook. His brother sealed him in a coffin with molten lead and dismembered his body into fourteen pieces, after which his wife Isis recovered thirteen of them. For ten points, identify this god who was killed by Set and became the Egyptian god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Osiris [accept Usiris, Aser, or Wesir]

Result: 358 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 35792

Question: One person whom Zeus turned into this animal was an Arcadian king whose fifty children were killed because he cooked his son Nycteus. In Norse mythology, the children of Mundilfari, Mani and Sol, are chased by two of these creatures named Hati and Skoll. Another one of these creatures currently bound by (*) Gleipnir is a son of Loki who bit off the hand of Tyr and will eventually swallow Odin. In the founding myth of Rome, a female one of these animals nursed Romulus and Remus. For ten points, name these canine animals, one example of which is Fenrir.

ANSWER: wolf [accept werewolf; do not accept or prompt on "dog"]

Result: 359 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 35802

Question: A goddess sends Allecto to enrage Queen Amata in an attempt to prevent this man from getting married a third time. This leader's son notes that his comrades are fulfilling a prophecy by eating the bread which they used as their tables. That son, (*) Ascanius, will go on to found Alba Longa. This hero is the product of Venus' love affair with his father Anchises. A large storm causes this man and his hunting companion to be trapped in a cave, the start of his romance with the Carthaginian queen Dido. For ten points, identify this Trojan hero whose descendants will found Rome, the subject of an epic by Vergil.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 360 | LIST | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 35836

Question: This man killed his only son Connla because he refused to identify himself, even though he had told Aife to instruct their son to never reveal his name. This husband of Emer had a charioteer named Laeg, who is killed by the first of Lugaid's spears. This man trained with the warrior-woman Scathatch, after which he received a (*) spear with 49 barbs, which he used to fight Queen Mebd's armies in the Cattle Raid of Cooley. As a youth, he killed a fierce guard dog and earned a new name after agreeing to replace it while a new one could be found. For ten points, name this wielder of the spear Gae Bolg, a hero who appears in Ireland's Ulster Cycle.

ANSWER: Cu Chulainn [or Hound of Culann or equivalents; accept Setanta]

Result: 361 | Masonic | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 42861

Question: This god broke a goblet by throwing it at Hymir's [HIGH-mir's] head, and he followed that act by carrying a cauldron that was a mile deep. This god tricked Alvis into being petrified so that Alvis would not marry this god's daughter Thrud [throod]. This son of Jord lost in combat to old age personified as Elli. Grid warned this god about a trap, and aided him in the subsequent battle with Geirrod [gayr-RODE]. That trap involved attacking this god when he did not have his magic belt Megingjoro [meh-geeng-YOE-roe] and his magic hammer Mjolnir [MOLE-nir]. Name this Norse thunder god.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 362 | Masonic | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 50911

Question: This god is sometimes depicted reclining on a Shesha [SHAY-shah], a serpent found within an ocean of milk. After almost dying in single combat with Jalamdhara [jah-lahm-DAH-rah], his consort begged for his life. Two hairs plucked from this god's head impregnated Devaki [DAY-vah-kee]. This god's mount was born from an egg laid by Vinata [vee-NAH-tah]. He took the form of seafoam in aiding Indra in the killing of Vritra [VREE-trah]. This husband of Lakshmi [LAHK-shmee] will be Kalki in his tenth incarnation. Name this "preserver" of the Hindu trimurti [tree-MUR-tee], a god with ten avatars.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 363 | Masonic | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 50959

Question: At Aulis [AW-lis], one group was delayed in its voyage to this conflict due to Artemis [AHR-teh-mis] sending an unfavorable wind. During this conflict, the horses Xanthus and Balius [BAHL-yus] were struck dumb by the Furies. As prophesied, Protesilaus [proe-teh-SIH-laus] was the first to die during it, as he was the first on land. Helenus [HEL-uh-nus] was forced to reveal what would bring about the end of it, which included capturing the Palladium [puh-LAY-dee-um] statue. This conflict was sparked by Paris' kidnapping of Helen. Name this decade-long conflict which saw the invading Greeks conquer a city in Asia Minor, the subject of The Iliad.

ANSWER: Trojan War

Result: 364 | Masonic | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 50984

Question: In the Iliad, Homer wrote that this god's wife was the youngest Grace, Aglaea [ah-GLAY-uh], after his divorce. During the Trojan War, this god fought the river-god Scamander [SKAH-man-der]. He once arrived to Olympus on the back of a mule after Dionysus [die-oh-NIE-sus] got him drunk. This god is credited with designing the sandal of Hermes and the aegis of Athena. His palace was on Lemnos, where he landed after he was struck from Olympus. That fall made him a cripple, and he was often cheated on by his beautiful wife Aphrodite. Name this Greek god of smithing, volcanoes, and fire.

ANSWER: Hephaestus (accept Vulcan until "Greek")

Result: 365 | Masonic | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 42903

Question: This god was put on trial and acquitted of murdering Halirrhotius [ha-lee-ROE-tee-us]. This god was trapped in a jar for over a year by the Aloadae [a-loe-a-day]. Through Otrera, this god was the father of Penthesilea [pen-theh-SIH-lay-uh]. After slaying this god's son Dracon, Cadmus served him for eight years before marrying Harmonia, this god's daughter through Aphrodite [a-froe-DIE-tee]. Name this Greek war god.

ANSWER: Ares (accept Mars until "Greek")

Result: 366 | Masonic | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 42907

Question: Yezidis [YEH-zih-dees] worship this figure under the name Iblis, while he was also described as the prosecutor at the court of Yahweh [YAH-way]. In the Intertestamental period, this figure was referred to as Sammael. This character is the subject of Isaiah 14:12, where he was described as "the morning star." In Luke 10:18, this character "fell like lightning from heaven." One of his names means 'lord of the flies.' Name this character commonly portrayed as a fallen angel, the archenemy of God and ruler of Hell.

ANSWER: Satan (accept Lucifer, the Devil, Diabolus, Beelzebub, Belial, Beliar, or equivalents)

Result: 367 | Masonic | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 42951

Question: After Heracles [HEHR-uh-klees] slew one of this god's cattle, Menoetes [meh-NOE-eh-tees] wrestled Heracles. One of this god's lovers was turned into a mint plant by his jealous wife, and another lover was turned into a white poplar. Also called "the Rich One," this god owned a helmet that made its wearer invisible. Due to eating pomegranate [po-meh-GRA-net], Persephone had to spend part of her time with this god, her husband. This god combined with his brothers Zeus and Poseidon to defeat the Titans. Name this Greek lord of the underworld.

ANSWER: Hades (accept Pluto until "Greek")

Result: 368 | Masonic | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 42968

Question: Along with Cybele [SIH-beh-lee], this goddess and her husband were honored by Romans during Hilaria. This goddess taught her worshippers to bake and brew beer. She was beheaded by her son when she pitied her brother. She used Wadjet as a wet nurse while her son was in hiding, as Seth laid claim to the throne. This goddess gathered the body parts of her husband and resurrected him after his murder. Name this sister of Nephthys [NEF-this] and wife of Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis

Result: 369 | Masonic | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 50872

Question: This character met Eldir in the forest after he was driven away for killing Fimafeng [FEE-mah-fayng]. Odin claimed that this god lived under the earth for eight winters. Before declaring that Aegir [AE-jir] could never give a feast again, this character criticized Idun [EE-doon] for embracing her brother's killer. He handed Hodur [HODE-ur] enchanted mistletoe and aimed it at Baldr [BAL-dur], killing the god. He is the father of Fenrir and the mother of Sleipnir [SLAYP-nir]. Name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 370 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 33414

Question: Drops of blood generated during one of this man's adventures gave rise to the creature that killed the Argonaut seer Mopsus. One story tells of how this man exchanged kingdoms with his cousin Megapenthes. Pausanias claimed that during a visit to Larissa, he invented the quoit, with which he accidentally killed his grandfather Acrisius. The Hesperides gave a kibisis to this man, who was raised on Seriphos by a (*) fisherman named Dictys. This man slew the monster Cetus, thus circumventing a prophecy that the oracle of Ammon had given to Cepheus and Cassiopeia. This man stole the tooth and eye shared by the Graeae while on one quest and ended another by rescuing and marrying Andromeda. For 10 points, name this son of Zeus and Danae who killed the Gorgon Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 371 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 33796

Question: In one story, this deity got angry at the lack of respect given by Mount Ebih and destroyed that mountain with the "seven-headed cita weapon". In another story, this deity is accused of giving the lion "pits to fall in" and of turning Ishullanu into a mole, after which she has an animal's thigh thrown in her face. This deity was struck with sixty diseases after passing through (*) seven gates and being forced to remove an article of clothing at each one. This goddess sent the Bull of Heaven to earth after she was turned down by Gilgamesh. She journeyed to the underworld, which is ruled by her sister Ereshkigal, possibly with the goal of reviving her lover Tammuz. For 10 points, name this Assyro-Babylonian god of war, sex, and love, who is often conflated with the Sumerian Inanna.

ANSWER: Ishtar [accept Inanna until "Inanna" is read]

Result: 372 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 33827

Question: One of these characters, Hylonome, loyally committed suicide after the death of her husband Cyllarus. Two of them named Hylaeus and Rhaecus were killed by Meleager in defense of Atalanta. One of these characters, the son of Cronus and the nymph Philyra, rescued the unarmed Peleus and traded his immortality for the life of Prometheus, while another one gave a shirt soaked in his poisoned blood to (*) Deianeira. Many of them lived on Mount Pelion, and most stories consider them the children of Ixion and Nephele. One of them named Eurytus drunkenly attempted to abduct Hippodamia, sparking a massive fight with the Lapiths which did not involve the most famous example of them, the wise teacher Chiron. For 10 points, name these mythical creatures whose bodies were half-man and half-horse.

ANSWER: centaurs [or hippocentaurs; or kentauros]

Result: 373 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 33855

Question: One opponent of these people died when he was fed a bird which had been treated with plaster and gypsum, while another of their opponents was fooled by a giant fake crab and crushed by a mountain, thus avenging the earlier deaths of the Four Hundred Boys. These characters were conceived when a skull spit into their mother's palm. They also killed a bird who was pretending to be the sun and the moon using a blowgun. One of them was decapitated in the (*) Bat House, but was able to recover his real head during a ball game. They were able to retrieve their father's remains after tricking One Death and Seven Death into killing themselves. These killers of Seven Macaw were also victorious over the lords of Xibalba. For 10 points, name this pair of Mayan brothers, whose names were Hunahpu and Xbalanque.

ANSWER: the Mayan Hero Twins [accept Hunahpu and Xbalanque in either order until their names are read]

Result: 374 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 33433

Question: A depiction of this deity being offered wine can be found on the 400 Year Stela. This god is represented by an unusual fork-tailed animal called the "sha". This god's cult center was near the modern town of Naqada, at a city called Ombos. He was tricked by another god's use of gypsum-covered wood into building a boat out of stone, which naturally sank and lost him a race. In another story, a golden disk appears on this deity's forehead, revealing his consumption of some (*) semen-filled lettuce. He was chosen to be the patron god of the Hyksos, and he stood at the prow of the solar barque, where he fought Apep. This husband of Nephthys killed his brother, leading to a conflict over inheritance of the kingship with his nephew Horus. For 10 points, name this chaotic Egyptian storm god, the brother of Osiris.

ANSWER: Set [or Seth; or Setesh; or Setekh; or Suty]

Result: 375 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 33448

Question: According to one source, this deity sometimes hangs out at a sunken bank and drinks from golden cups with the goddess Saga. This deity's position was usurped for a decade by a crafty wizard named Ollerus. He fathered a son with a goddess known alternately as Fjörgyn or Jörd. He presided over twelve judges called the Diar in his hall Gladsheim, while his other hall contained a throne from which he could see the entire universe called (*) Hlidskjalf. He gives all of his food to the wolves Geri and Freki and learns about the world from his ravens Hugin and Munin. With his brothers Vili and Ve, he killed the giant Ymir and fashioned the world from the body. This god carries the spear Gungnir and rides the eight-legged horse Sleipnir. For 10 points, name this one-eyed All-Father, the chief god of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin [or Othin; or Woden; or Wotanaz]

Result: 376 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 33461

Question: This deity helped Dexicreon become rich by advising him to buy jars of water and was assisted in the birth of her daughter Beroe by Themis. This goddess, who saved the Argonaut Butes from the Sirens, eventually came to be worshipped in two forms, one of which was labeled "Pandemos". Angering this deity was indirectly the cause of death for both Glaucus of Corinth and (*) Hippolytus. Homer unusually describes her as a daughter of the Titaness Dione, who consoles her after she is wounded by Diomedes. Major sites of her worship included the Cypriot city Paphos and the island of Cythera. This child of Uranus had an affair with Anchises that produced Aeneas, and she was caught sleeping with Ares by her husband Hephaestus. For 10 points, name this mother of Eros, the Greek goddess of love.

ANSWER: Aphrodite

Result: 377 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 33562

Question: This deity convinced a moon god to return Tara to her husband Brhaspati. He tricked Taraka into accepting a boon of limited invulnerability and talked the ketaki flower into lying about his having traveled to the end of a huge burning lingam. The sage Daksha was born from the right thumb of this inhabitant of Satyaloka. His ten children share a collective title with the Vedic god with whom he was identified, Prajapati. He rides a (*) swan, like his wife Saraswati, and he is often depicted holding a water pot, a sacrificial ladle, a string of prayer beads, and a copy of the Vedas. He was born from a lotus that grew out of Vishnu's navel. For 10 points, name this four-headed, four-armed "creator" member of the Hindu Trimurti.

ANSWER: Brahma [accept Brahm (eliding the final 'a'); do not accept "Brahman" or "Brahmana" or "Brahmin" or "Brahms", but do accept "hey remember that IS-set tossup on the letters 'B-R-A-H-M', wasn't that a trip"]

Result: 378 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 33572

Question: After ravaging the Phrygian kingdom of Teleutas, a character of this name was able to father Eurysaces with his war prize, the concubine Tecmessa. Another character of this name was shipwrecked on the gurai petrai but would have survived had he not boasted of his superiority to Poseidon. One man of this name exchanged a purple sash for a sharp sword after knocking down Hector with a huge boulder in a duel. The man who raped (*) Cassandra in a temple of Athena shared this name with a man who used a massive seven-layer shield to defend his archer brother Teucer. The most famous character of this name slaughtered a flock of sheep and committed suicide after the loss of Achilles's armor to Odysseus drove him mad. For 10 points, give this name shared by a Locrian king and a son of Telamon who were known, respectively, as "the Lesser" and "the Greater".

ANSWER: Ajax [or Aias]

Result: 379 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 33598

Question: During the Gigantomachy, this deity killed the giant Clytius. After Galinthias was punished for tricking Hera into allowing Alcmene to give birth by being transformed into a weasel, this deity took pity on her and made the weasel her sacred animal. The major cult site of this only child of Perses and Asteria was at Lagina, and she was often depicted holding a pair of torches, which she used to help (*) Demeter search for Persephone. This deity's companions include Mormo, Empousa, and Lamia, and she was also often accompanied by a black dog. The most famous priestess of this goddess was the sorceress Medea. For 10 points, name this three-headed Greek goddess of crossroads and witchcraft.

ANSWER: Hecate

Result: 380 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 33619

Question: This man pulls the body of a false Christian out of a tomb, after which he meets and rewards Melias de Lile. In another story, he receives a previously-cursed white shield bearing a blood-red cross from a squire of Bagdemagus. He and two older companions were imprisoned for a year by King Estorause. This man's birth was arranged in part by Dame Brusen, who disguised his mother Elaine of Corbenic as another woman. According to the Vulgate Cycle, he is descended from Bron, the brother-in-law of (*) Joseph of Arimathea. He dies on the island of Sarras after ferrying an object there on Solomon's ship on orders from King Pelles. He quests alongside Sir Bors and Sir Perceval, and he is the only knight able to survive sitting in the Siege Perilous. For 10 points, name this illegitimate son of Lancelot whose purity of heart allows him to achieve the Grail.

ANSWER: Sir Galahad [accept Galeas or Galath or Gwalchavad, but not "Galehaut"]

Result: 381 | MUT | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 33784

Question: This man fathered the twins Nebrophon and Euneus with the Lemnian queen Hypsipyle. His father committed suicide by drinking bull's blood, an act which prompted the murder of this man's brother Promachus. This man ordered the construction of a pentekontoros built partly using wood from the oak grove at Dodona and employed the advice of Phineas in order to pass through the (*) Symplegades. While helping a disguised Hera cross the Anauros river, he lost a sandal, thus fulfilling a prophecy involving his usurping uncle Pelias. During a trip to Colchis, this man plowed a field using fire-breathing oxen and, like Cadmus, defeated warriors grown from dragon's teeth. His second wife Glauce was jealously killed by his first wife, the sorceress Medea. For 10 points, name this hero who led the Argonauts in search of the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Jason [or Iason, but definitely not "Aeson"]

Result: 382 | MUT | 2014 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 33858

Question: One character in this work receives a golden apple from a crow which causes her to become pregnant for six years. Another character in this text has his face smeared with honey in order to avoid the fate that befell nine of his brothers, namely being eaten by a she-wolf, while a third character in this story learns the language of the birds after tasting dragon's blood. That character's father is the only person able to retrieve a sword a (*) one-eyed beggar plunges into the trunk of the tree Barnstokk. The main character of its second half kills his foster-father Regin shortly after slaying the serpent Fafnir and aids Gunnar in marrying Brynhild. For 10 points, name this Norse epic about the title patriarch and his descendents, including Sigmund and Sigurd.

ANSWER: the Volsung Saga [or the Völsungasaga; or the Saga of the Volsungs; do not accept "the Nibelungenlied" as none of the events described happen in it and "Gunnar" and "Brynhild" are Norse names]

Result: 383 | MUT | 2014 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 33889

Question: A ceremony dedicated to this god involved striking a pig with a piece of flintstone taken from a temple dedicated to his Feretrius aspect, and was performed by a collegium of priests called the fetials. Feasts dedicated to this deity took place on the ides of September and November. Oaths were sworn on a stone dedicated to this deity, his namesake "lapis", and his other epithets included Stator and Tonans. The high priest of this deity was only allowed to undress indoors, was the only one allowed to wear a conical white cap called the albogalerus, and was known as the (*) Flamen Dialis. He was a member of the Archaic Triad with Quirinus and Mars, and later made up the Capitoline Triad with Minerva and his wife Juno. For 10 points, name this thunderbolt-slinging chief Roman deity.

ANSWER: Jupiter [or Iuppiter; or Jove, do not prompt on or accept "Zeus"]

Result: 384 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 43057

Question: During the quest for the Holy Grail, Gawain has a dream about 150 of these animals, 147 of them black and three white. Dirce, the mother of Amphion and Zethus, is killed by one of these creatures. Donn Cuailnge and Finnbhenach are two of these animals in Irish myth. The herald of Ptah at Memphis was usually represented by one of these animals. Queen Medb invades Ulster in order to steal one of these animals. Shiva's mount is one called Nandi. Apis is usually represented by one in Egyptian myth. Enkidu and Gilgamesh kill one of these animals sent by Ishtar from heaven in the Epic of Gilgamesh. For 10 points, name these animals, one of which terrorized Cretan youths as the Minotaur.

ANSWER: bulls [prompt on cows; prompt on cattle]

Result: 385 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 43274

Question: This goddess asks Boreas to cease the winds so that Achilles could light the funeral pyre of Patroclus. She is responsible for carrying around a golden jug containing the water from the river Styx. In the Aeneid, this goddess convinces the Trojan women to set fire to the Trojan ships on Sicily. This wife of Zephyr stops Zetes and Calais from pursuing the Harpies, and she aids the birth of Apollo and Artemis by bringing Eileithyia to Delos. At the end of the Iliad, this goddess instructs Priam to go to the Greek camps in order to retrieve the body of Hector. Like her sisters, the Harpies, this daughter of Thaumas and Electra possesses wings. For 10 points, name this Greek messenger goddess, who is also the goddess of rainbows.

ANSWER: Iris

Result: 386 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 43363

Question: Cicero claimed that a priest of this god was not allowed to touch or name goats, raw meat, ivy or beans. Numa Pompilius tricked this god into accepting sacrifices of onions, hair, and fish instead of humans. The flamen dialis and the fetial priests were dedicated to this god, who turned Juturna into a pool of water. This god, whose aspects have epithets like "tonans" and "fulgur," was represented by an oak tree. He tells Venus the future history of Rome in the first book of the Aeneid. A temple on the Capitoline was dedicated to his aspect "Optimus Maximus." For 10 points, name this chief Roman god.

ANSWER: Jupiter [or Jove; prompt on Zeus]

Result: 387 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 43385

Question: A king who was transformed into one of these animals with his seven sons is defeated with the help of Mabon.One of these animals has between his ears some scissors, a comb, and a razor that are needed to shave the giant Ysbadadden. In Hindu myth, one of these animals dives to the bottom of the ocean to rescue Bhudevi, an earth goddess, from the demon Hiranyaksha. Half of the Welsh tale Culhwch and Olwen concerns one of these animals called Twrch Trwyth. Vishnu takes the form of one of these animals as Varaha. When Artemis sends one of these animals to punish King Oeneus for neglecting her in sacrifices, Peleus and other heroes show up to kill it. For 10 points, name the type of animal slain by Meleager during a hunt in Calydon.

ANSWER: a boar

Result: 388 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 43395

Question: n a post-Classical story, the Cypriot youth Cymon falls in love with this sleeping woman. The story of this woman, which begins with the unwise slaughter of a pregnant hare, includes her theft of a xoanon, or carved cult image, when she is in the land of King Thoas. This character is taken away under the pretense that she will be wedded to Achilles. Later in life, she becomes a priestess of Artemis, who had replaced her with a deer at the instant of her death. Calchas declares that this woman's sacrifice is needed to allow the Greek fleet to sail to Troy, so her father Agamemmnon seizes her. For 10 points, name this woman who, according to Euripides, goes to Tauris after fleeing Aulis.

ANSWER: Iphigenia

Result: 389 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 15 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 43436

Question: One member of this group avenges the death of his father and returns wearing his father's armor, hence his nickname meaning "badly-fitting coat." Another member of this group makes a lion into his pet by saving it from a snake. This group was first mentioned in the Roman de Brut penned by Wace. Prior to becoming a member of this group, a lowly kitchen boy received the nickname "Good Hands," or "Beaumains." A vacant spot among this group, Siege Perilous, is filled by a youthful bastard child who begins the Grail Quest. For 10 points, name this group, all of whose members supposedly had equal status, that hung out at King Arthur's Court.

ANSWER: Knights of the Round Table [prompt on answers like King Arthur's Court or King Arthur's knights before the very end]

Result: 390 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 16 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 43584

Question: After this man criticizes Idomeneus for "always laying down the law," he is mocked for having a "vile temper." The Athenians named their 9th tribe after this hero, who gives the third and most convincing appeal in the embassy episode. This husband of Tecmessa names his son, Eurysaces, after the shield he uses protect his half-brother in battle. During a war, this brother of Teucer gives Hector a purple sash and receives a sword after fighting him to a draw. In a play by Sophocles, he is entranced by Athena and slaughters a flock of sheep believing they are his rivals. This man goes insane and kills himself after he loses a contest to Odysseus to obtain Achilles' armor. For 10 points, name this king of Salamis who fought in the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Ajax the Greater [or Telamonian Ajax; or Telamonian Aias]

Result: 391 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 17 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 43605

Question: A maltreated son of this man offered so many fire offerings that a god's throne grew too hot. The familiar man with this name is actually the seventh out of fourteen, each of whom presides over a namesake era lasting three hundred million years. This man placed a cgrowing reature in a jar, then transferred it to successively larger containers, until it nearly filled up an ocean. This man lectures to an audience of rishis on legal matters in a 1st century BC discourse about his "laws." This man housed animals and different types of seeds in a boat he built after listening to Matsya, the horned fish first avatar of Vishnu. For 10 points, name this survivor of a deluge, the progenitor of mankind in Hindu mythology.

ANSWER: Vaivasvata Manu

Result: 392 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 18 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 43642

Question: Pelias murdered his evil stepmother Sidero in a temple to this deity, who held a grudge against Pelias afterwards. After this deity poisoned the water supply of Aegina, the island was repopulated by ants that were turned into humans. This goddess was once trapped by a magical throne. This goddess blinded Tiresias for his opinion in the great sex enjoyment debate. Chelone was transformed into a tortoise for refusing to attend the wedding of this goddess, which happened soon after she was seduced in the form of a cuckoo. She once tossed Hephaestus out of Mount Olympus. For 10 points, name this goddess who was vengeful against the many mistresses of her husband Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera [or Juno]

Result: 393 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 19 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 43656

Question: ne goddess in this myth system was originally a very promiscuous woman who was cut apart by her suitors, and whose body gave birth to a plant. One goddess in this mythology put her baby on the ground to determine its father; the baby crawled toward the moon god, who had impregnated that goddess using sperm hidden in fruit. In this mythology, one ruler's brother was able to destroy hills with his slingshot, and was turned to ice or trapped in a cave because of his cruelty. One ruler of these people was told to build a temple at the site that a golden staff sunk into the earth. Another god in this pantheon kept the Milky Way in a jug and used it to create rain; that god was Ilyap'a. For 10 points, name this mythological system in which the sun god Inti was born of the supreme deity Viracocha, who was in turn the grandfather of the legendary first emperor Manco Capac.

ANSWER: Incan myth

Result: 394 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 43086

Question: This thing was done at the enkoimeterion facility by sick followers of Asclepius at the holy site of Epidaurus in the hopes of receiving a vision. Before Aeneas's helmsman Palinurus falls overboard to his death, the gods force him to do this thing. To retain his eternal youth, Selene's lover Endymion did this thing continually. The Greek god of this deed worked with Thanatos to carry Sarpedon's corpse from the battlefield of Troy. Psyche first sees the face of Cupid by torchlight while he is doing this thing, which is personified by the father of Morpheus. For 10 points, name this activity presided over by Hypnos.

ANSWER: sleeping [or resting; or dreaming or receiving visions until "receiving visions" is read; prompt on prayer until "force him to do this thing" is read]

Result: 395 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 20 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 43676

Question: The Derveni papyrus is attributed to this man, who names a set of ancient world beliefs in which a silver egg surrounded by a serpent hatches into the god Phanes. This human names a set of hymns worshipping the proto-Dionysiac god Zagreus. He relates several stories, including the deaths of Cyparissus and Adonis, after he incites a grove of trees to grow around him in Book X of Ovid's Metamorphoses. The Hebrus river contained part of this Ciconian king after maenads ripped his head off. This man helped the Argonauts overcome the Sirens some time after his wife died by snakebite on their wedding night. For 10 points, name this man who defied an order not to look behind him, a mythical musician who failed to rescue his lover Eurydice from Hades.

ANSWER: Orpheus

Result: 396 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 43109

Question: This man found a chest full of treasure by telling his master to dig at the spot where he dropped a hat. This man tricked Rhun into cutting off a maid's finger to try to prove he had slept with a noblewoman. While skating, he fell into a trance and saw the son of Gwyddno in a dungeon. This man inadvertently foiled a woman's attempt to bless her ugly son Morfran. He won a horse race against King Maelgwn with Dobbin, thus helping out his master Elphin, who caught this man while fishing for salmon in a weir. He gained his ability by swallowing three drops of a potion, after which Ceridwen ate this man when he turned into a grain. For 10 points, name this mythical bard named for the phrase meaning "shining brow" in Welsh.

ANSWER: Taliesin [accept Gwion Bach]

Result: 397 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 43117

Question: One place of this name was home to a nymph named Adrasteia and her sister. The Curetes danced and made loud warlike noises in one location of this name. A golden cloud atop a place of this name hides Hera's seduction of Zeus midway through the Iliad; that place of this name contains the headwaters of the Scamander river and the spot where a god disguised as an eagle abducted Ganymede. A cave in a more southerly place of this name was home to the goat Amalthea and a horn of plenty, which fed a hidden child of Rhea. For 10 points, give this name shared by a mountain near Troy and the mountain on Crete where baby Zeus was raised.

ANSWER: Mount Ida [accept Cretan Ida; accept Phrygian Ida; accept any answer indicating a cave on Mount Ida until "cloud" is read; prompt on Crete until "seduction" is read]

Result: 398 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 43146

Question: A temple to Ptolemy VI was built as a double temple with axes leading to the sanctuaries of Horus and this deity and was located at Kom Ombo. This god's mother was the patroness of the city of Sais and was traditionally shown wearing a red crown and a bow and crossed arrows. The son of Neith, he was honored with the new name of the city of Arsinoe. This god was represented by a live creature known as Petsuchos. In the Book of the Dead, this god assisted in the birth of Horus, and he rescued the children of Horus with a fishing net. Additionally, this god carried Osiris on his back following Osiris' death and saved Osiris' hands with a fish trap. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god who was represented as a crocodile.

ANSWER: A temple to Ptolemy VI was built as a double temple with axes leading to the sanctuaries of Horus and this deity and was located at Kom Ombo. This god's mother was the patroness of the city of Sais and was traditionally shown wearing a red crown and a bow and crossed arrows. The son of Neith, he was honored with the new name of the city of Arsinoe. This god was represented by a live creature known as Petsuchos. In the Book of the Dead, this god assisted in the birth of Horus, and he rescued the children of Horus with a fishing net. Additionally, this god carried Osiris on his back following Osiris' death and saved Osiris' hands with a fish trap. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god who was represented as a crocodile.

Result: 399 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 43164

Question: This man went to Crete to celebrate the funeral of his grandfather Catreus, a descendant of Minos. One of his sons is named "great sorrow" because that son was born from his affair with a concubine. He kills Euphorbus while moving Patroclus' body off the battlefield, and also murders Deiphobus at Troy. Athena convinces Pandarus to wound this hero in Book IV of the Iliad, ending a truce. He wrestled with Proteus while in Egypt. Odysseus swore an oath of loyalty to this man before this man won his wife in a game of pulling straws. Tyndareus cedes the throne to this son of Atreus and brother of Agamemnon. Neoptolemus marries this man's daughter Hermione. For 10 points, name this king of Sparta, the original husband of Helen.

ANSWER: Menelaus

Result: 400 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 43187

Question: The definitive book about this character was written in 2007 by William and Mary professor Scott Reynolds Nelson, who argued that he is buried in a "white house" behind a Virginia penitentiary. This character's wife is sometimes called Julie Ann, and in the stories frequently tells him, "I've been true to you." In one account of his life, he receives fifty dollars from his white captain but dies shortly after telling his son that the "Big Ben Tunnel gonna be the death of me." This character battles a steam powered device while building a railroad tunnel and dies after winning the contest. For 10 points, name this legendary "steel-driving" man from American folklore.

ANSWER: John Henry [or John]

Result: 401 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 43226

Question: This woman bore a son who indirectly caused Phaethon's death by questioning his claim to be the son of Helios. Book I of Herodotus claims that Phoenician sailors' abduction of this woman provoked all future conflicts between the East and West. In Prometheus Bound, Prometheus tells this woman that her descendant, Heracles, will release him from his torment. This mother of Epaphus and daughter of Inachus was taken to bed by a god in the form of a white cloud. Hera sent a gadfly to pursue this woman across the world, leading her to jump across the Bosphorus and end up in Egypt. Hermes rescued this woman by boring and then killing Argus Panoptes. For 10 points, name this mistress whom Zeus turned into a white cow.

ANSWER: Io

Result: 402 | NASAT | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 43249

Question: One story from this myth system relates how a woman allowed her caterpillar husband to suck her blood every night. Children who wander off alone along a shore may be taken by a creature called the Qalupalik from this mythology. According to this mythology, the energy that drives life is called Sila. One of its gods, Anguta, found his daughter had married a bird and tried to take her back. However, after a storm created by the bird led him to throw his daughter overboard, that god from this mythology was forced to chop off her fingers when she tried to hold on, and the severed fingers turned into seals and walruses. For 10 points, identify this myth system which has the sea goddess Sedna and is found in the Arctic populations of North America.

ANSWER: Inuit mythology [prompt on Eskimo mythology]

Result: 403 | New Trier Scobol Solo | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 58153

Question: An annual festival confused the tomb of Djer with the tomb of this god and took place in Abydos. When the Apis Bull died, it became associated with this god, and beds were made with holes in the shape of this god that were filled with seeds. Herodotus wrote that the stories about this Egyptian god impacted the stories about Dionysus. A tree grew around a chest that contained this god. This green-skinned father of Horus had his body cut into pieces that, according to some sources, were scattered by his brother Set. He took over the role of god of the underworld from Anubis. Name this Egyptian god who was both the brother and the husband of Isis.

ANSWER: Osiris [or Asir or Usiris]

Result: 404 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 32251

Question: This hero's wife murdered his illegitimate son Chrysippus, the lover of the Theban king Laius. A lover of Poseidon, he married his daughter Eurydice to Perseus' son Electryon. This man passed a curse on to the House of Atreus because he treacherously hurled a son of Hermes off a cliff. This king of Pisa won (*) Hippodamia's hand by having Myrtilus rig a chariot race against King Oenomaus. The Olympians gave this man an ivory shoulder after re-attaching the body parts cooked into a meal by his father. For 10 points, name this son of Tantalus who legendarily lent his name to the peninsula containing Sparta.

ANSWER: Pelops

Result: 405 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 32472

Question: Jara killed this god by shooting him in the foot with a reed made from the powder of an ill-omened pestle. This god was switched at birth to avoid being killed by King Kamsa. This god purified a river of poison by fatally dancing on the hundred heads of the serpent Kaliya. Duryodhana chose this god's army over this god himself. In his youth, this (*) blue-skinned god was a butter-thief notorious for pulling pranks on the gopis. During the Kurukshetra War, this charioteer convinced one of the Pandavas to go to war against his cousins. For 10 points, name this eighth avatar of Vishnu who advises Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita.

ANSWER: Krishna [prompt on Vishnu]

Result: 406 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 32487

Question: In one account, this god fathers the Hunnish king Sigi and has his wife give Rerir a fertility-granting golden apple; in that same collection, he challenges guests at a wedding feast to draw a sword out of the oak tree Barnstokk. In a different story, this god turns into a snake to fit through a hole in a mountain after spending a summer as Baugi's servant. He habitually seeks counsel from the head of (*) Mimir, who once guarded a well where this god made a sacrifice. This god, who retrieves the mead of poetry, scopes out the earth from Hlidskjalf and gives his meat to the wolves Geri and Freki. This god rides on the eight-legged horse Sleipnir. For 10 points, name this one-eyed, spear-carrying chief god in Norse myth.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wotan]

Result: 407 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 24 | Mythology | NoneID: 32503

Question: Apollodorus states that one of these figures named Okypete collapsed on the Strophades, giving them their current name. A pair of flying purple-haired warriors spared the lives of these creatures at the request of Iris. One of these creatures slept with Zephyrus to produce Xanthus and Balius, the immortal horses of Achilles. Various sources list the name of these figures as Podarge and (*) Celaeno. The prophecy of one of these creatures came true when Aeneas' men ate meat on bread. These creatures continuously stole the food of a king who was blinded for revealing the future to mankind; Zetes and Calais drove these creatures away from that king, Phineas, in the myth of the Argo. For 10 points, name these birds that appear like human women in Greek mythology.

ANSWER: harpies

Result: 408 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 32513

Question: When this god was still in the womb, his mother pressed her fingers on the soil to create the dactyls. He once suspended his wife from the clouds using a silver thread while her feet were tied with anvils. With his son, this god was fed by the elderly Phrygian couple Baucis and Philemon, and he turned them into an oak and linden tree for their hospitality. While this god was a child, the (*) Curetes made loud noises to mask his crying. In one story, this god gave a mortal woman Laelaps, a javelin that never missed and Talos. In that story, this god transformed into a white bull to abduct Europa. For 10 points, name this Greek god who struck down his foes with lightning bolts.

ANSWER: Zeus [or Jupiter]

Result: 409 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 32535

Question: On this god's "Great Night," worshipers imitate a hunter who escaped tigers by dropping a thousand bilwa leaves on a representation of him. Devotees of this god draw three vibhuti lines across their foreheads in white ash. He is shown with his hair turning into a river in depictions of that river's descent. This god is often depicted resting on an animal skin and holding a (*) trident; alternatively, he crushes a dwarf beneath his foot as Nataraja, the cosmic dancer. Mount Kailasa is sacred to this god, the husband of Parvati and father of Ganesh. For 10 points, name this destroyer god of the Hindu Trimurti.

ANSWER: Shiva [or Siva]

Result: 410 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 32547

Question: During one of these events for Anchises' funeral, Jupiter sends down fire to honor Acestes. In the Mahabharata, participants in one of these events keep their eyes on the reflection of an artificial fish. Draupadi is married based on the outcome of one of these events, which Arjuna wins. After failing in one of these events, (*) Antinous and Eurymachus try to prevent a beggar from participating. The most famous of these incidents in myth involves a row of twelve axeheads; after winning that one, Odysseus massacres the suitors. For 10 points, identify the sort of athletic competition that Robin Hood won by splitting his opponent's arrow.

ANSWER: archery contests [accept anything that indicates a competition involving shooting a bow and arrow]

Result: 411 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 32632

Question: A goddess of this type attacks successively as an eel, wolf, and heifer and recovers from wounds by giving a hero three drinks of milk. A peacock carries a Hindu god of this type who loses a race to his brother Ganesha. Badb, Macha and Nemain together comprise a goddess of this type who often turns into a crow. These gods include Kartikeya in Hinduism, Hachiman in Shinto, and the (*) Morrigan from Ireland. The Aloadae imprison the Greek god of this domain in a jar; Cadmus kills a dragon sacred to that god of this type, who takes an embarrassing wound from Diomedes and is accompanied by Phobos and Deimos. For 10 points, name this type of god exemplified by Mars and Ares.

ANSWER: war gods [or gods of battle; or triple goddesses until "Hindu god of this type" is read; or equivalents]

Result: 412 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 15 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 32644

Question: This god was flying as a hawk when Geirroth captured him to make this god bring an enemy to Geirroth's castle. This god misguidedly attacked an ox-devouring eagle with a staff, starting a crisis he ended by turning Idunn into a nut. In the Volsung Saga, this god retrieves cursed gold for Hreidmar as a wergild for killing Otr. This god arranged Thiazzi's death, leading (*) Skadi to vow revenge against him. He accompanied a cross-dressing Thor on a mission to retrieve Mjollnir from Thrym. This god's wife Sigyn catches the poison that a snake drips onto him until he is freed at Ragnarok, where he will kill and be killed by Heimdall. For 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 413 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 16 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 32731

Question: The meandros motif found on ancient artifacts represented this location. Sir Arthur Evans suggested that this location took its name from a type of double-headed axe. The word "clue" derives etymologically from a tool used in this location, a replica of which inside Chartres Cathedral serves as an aid to meditation. In this location, one can find (*) Asterion, a son of Pasiphae and a figure sacred to Poseidon. Every year, seven young men and seven young girls were sent inside of this place. A hero who enters this structure is given a spool of thread by Ariadne so he can track his progress within it. For 10 points, name this structure created by Daedalus that houses the minotaur on Crete.

ANSWER: labyrinth

Result: 414 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 16 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 32737

Question: In this myth system, a group of owl messengers turn sap into a fake heart rather than kill a pregnant maiden. A villain in this myth system uses ants to trick four hundred boys into thinking he's dead, then turns them into the Pleiades; a mountain falls on top of that villain as he searches out a tasty crab. The oldest source on this myth system is an illustrated book named for (*) Dresden. Heroes in this myth system survive tests of darkness, razors, and ice cold before one of them is decapitated in the House of Bats, but still manage to win a climactic ball game against the Lords of Xibalba. For 10 points, name this myth system whose stories appear in the Popol Vuh and which is complemented by a long-count calendar ending in 2012.

ANSWER: Mayan mythology

Result: 415 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 17 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 32766

Question: One of these beings threatens to burn down a palace when a princess tries to get an egg to hang from its ceiling. Another of these beings offers a choice of deaths to the man who finds him, but later leads him to a pond of exotic fish that talk when fried; that one is initially restricted by a hexagram-shaped seal. Another of them became evil after arrogantly refusing to (*) bow before the first man. The marids, ghul, and ifrit belong to this class of beings, one of which is attached to a magic ring and rescues a young Chinese boy from a cave of treasures. For 10 points, name these mostly malevolent, but sometimes wish-granting spirits from Arabian mythology.

ANSWER: djinni [or genies; or djinn]

Result: 416 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 18 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 32803

Question: While performing this action, the Erinyes hum creepily before they find the scent of blood in The Eumenides. Psyche performs this action immediately after Zephyrus brings her to a meadow. A god of this domain often depicted with inverted torches marries the Grace Pasithea after doing Hera a favor. Odysseus' sailors cooked the (*) cattle of the sun while Odysseus was engaged in this activity. Selene falls in love with a shepherd who appears especially beautiful while doing this. The twin brother of Thanatos governs this activity, which Endymion performs eternally. For 10 points, name this restful activity controlled by Hypnos.

ANSWER: sleeping [on the first clue, accept waking up]

Result: 417 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 32268

Question: After witnessing this event, Cyane shed so many tears that she turned into a pool of water. The bawdy old maid Baubo consoled a woman affected by this event. The daughters of Achelous prayed to be given wings after this event and became the Sirens. Ascalaphus was pinned down under a boulder for revealing an inconvenient fact about its target. This event's target was gathering (*) lilies near Henna in Sicily. A nymph failed to stop this event when its perpetrator hurled his staff to the earth, opening up a chasm for him to escape. For 10 points, name this mythological incident in which Hades abducted a goddess to become his bride.

ANSWER: Hades' rape of Persephone [or Hades' rape of Proserpina; or anything involving Hades' abduction of Persephone or Proserpine]

Result: 418 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 20 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 32823

Question: This woman's first husband was a grandson of Tantalus who was also named Tantalus. This woman persuaded her husband to walk into his palace on an extravagant purple carpet. This mother of Chrysothemis wrote a letter to her husband asking him to light a (*) fire on Mt. Ida so that she would be aware when he returned. Odysseus tricked her into thinking that her daughter was to marry Achilles, but in actuality, that daughter, Iphigenia, was to be sacrificed at Aulis. This woman killed one of her victims by tossing a net over him before he was stabbed twice with a sword; she thus killed her husband with the assistance of her lover Aegisthus. For 10 points, name this wife of Agamemnon.

ANSWER: Clytemnestra [or Klytaemnestra]

Result: 419 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 21 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 32952

Question: Twelve captive soldiers were thrown onto this hero's funeral pyre, and his ashes were then deposited into an urn made by Hephaestus. This hero went into exile after murdering Clitonymus over a dice match. Pythagoras claimed to be reincarnated from this man's assailant, Euphorbus, who wounded this hero after Apollo appeared behind him to knock off his helmet. At (*) games held in this man's honor, Diomedes defeated Antilochus in a chariot race, and Odysseus beat Ajax the Lesser on foot. When his friend refused, this hero led the Myrmidons into battle wearing that friend's armor. For 10 points, name this friend of Achilles slain by Hector in the Iliad.

ANSWER: Patroclus

Result: 420 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 22 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 33246

Question: During a climactic battle, a sorceress in this myth system fuses her body with a shipwreck to become an eagle and carries her army on her wings. One character in this myth system draws a rake of steel and copper through a river to recover the pieces of her son's body. The thunder god of this myth system owns a warhammer known as his (*) vasara. The virgin-born child of Marjatta forces the major hero of this myth system to depart from his country on a raft, leaving behind a harp made from a pike's jaw, the kantele. To marry the maid of Pohjola, this myth system's god of the forge creates the Sampo. For 10 points, name this myth system whose heroes, including Ilmarinen, Lemminkainen, and Vainamoinen, have their stories told in Elias Lonnrot's Kalevala.

ANSWER: Finnish mythology

Result: 421 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 23 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 33276

Question: A son of Zeus and Electra became one of the founders of this city after fleeing Samothrace when Zeus killed his brother Iasion. This city's territory was at one point divided between the brothers Ilus and Assaracus. A deceptive king of this city offered his daughter Hesione to a sea monster sent by Poseidon, who was angry because that king failed to (*) pay Poseidon and Apollo for building this city's walls. Heracles sacked this city when he did not receive his promised immortal horses from Laomedon, who received those horses from Zeus as compensation for the rape of his brother, Ganymede. For 10 points, name this Anatolian city ruled by Priam during a ten-year war with the Greeks.

ANSWER: Troy [or Troia; or Ilium; or Ilion]

Result: 422 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 25 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 33317

Question: During the performance of this task, one man's sweat turned the leaves of a wreath from black to white. While performing this task, a hero rescued Ascalaphus and wrestled with the herdsman Menoetus. During this task, a monster involved dripped saliva on the ground that turned into the aconite plant. After its completion, its performer gave his wife in marriage to Iolaus, his charioteer. After witnessing its result, the king of Tiryns jumped into his (*) winejar for the third and final time. Persephone directed its performer to the river Acheron, and it involved a visit to Tartarus. For 10 points, name this twelfth and final labor of Heracles, which entailed the subduing of a hound in Hades.

ANSWER: the capture of Cerberus [accept obvious equivalents, accept the 12th labor of Heracles, or the last labor of Heracles before "twelfth]

Result: 423 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 32290

Question: In the Quran, this type of object provides the name for an Alexander the Great analogue who walls off Gog and Magog. In the Metamorphoses, Theseus' host recounts losing one of these body parts in a contest to marry Deianeira. After wrestling with Heracles, the river god Achelous lost one of these body parts. In the Book of Revelation, the Beast from the Sea possesses (*) ten of these body parts representing ten kings. Zeus' foster-mother Amalthea provided him with one of these objects that could produce endless amounts of food. For 10 points, name this body part whose absence distinguishes the horse from the unicorn.

ANSWER: a horn

Result: 424 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 32325

Question: Telemus delivered a prophecy to one of these creatures, who may have received a name meaning "big talker" after screaming to his neighbors for the first time. A god who killed these creatures was forced to spend one year as Admetus' slave - those members of this race were killed by a god who wanted to avenge his son (*) Asclepius. The most famous member of this race used a boulder to smash Acis out of jealousy when he loved Galatea. Three of them named Brontes, Steropes, and Arges forged Zeus' thunderbolts, and one of them was tricked into thinking his guest's name was "Outis," meaning "Nobody." For 10 points, name this race exemplified by Polyphemus, which had only one eye.

ANSWER: cyclops

Result: 425 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 32347

Question: On Mount Parnassus, goddesses called the thriae took the form of these animals. In Finnish myth, Otsotar creates one of these animals to help her brew ale. One of these animals sent the Hittite god Telipinu into a rage by waking him up. The Hindu god Kama used a bow whose string was made from these animals. The cultivation of these animals was first taught to the accidental killer of Eurydice, (*) Aristaeus. These animals, which symbolized the Barberini and the Merovingians, created a product that Aeneas put into a cake to pacify Cerberus. Odysseus used a byproduct of these animals to plug the ears of his sailors. For 10 points, name this insects that produce wax and honey.

ANSWER: honeybees

Result: 426 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 32360

Question: The phrase "sub rosa" derives from Roman depictions of this god with his finger to his lips holding a rose; that version of this god, which the Romans interpreted as a god of silence, represents the rising sun. This god was the father of Hapi, Imsety, and their two brothers, the protectors of the four cardinal directions. During a long-running conflict, he painted his wooden boat (*) gray to get his opponent to use an actual stone boat, which then sunk. This god's right and left eyes were the sun and moon, which may be because his eye was gouged out by a deity he relegated to rule over storms and deserts. This god engaged in a series of contests with his uncle, Set. For 10 points, name this falcon-headed son of Osiris in Egyptian myth.

ANSWER: Horus [or Harpocrates]

Result: 427 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 32397

Question: These creatures overcame a warrior with impenetrable skin by burying him underneath uprooted trees. In another story, two of these creatures named Hylaeus and Rhaecus attempted to rape Atalanta. One of these creatures named Eurytion assaulted Hippodamia during her wedding, which led to a conflict in which they smothered the warrior Caeneus. These creatures were born when a king attempted to rape (*) Hera, but instead copulated with the cloud Nephele. One of these figures gave Deianira a poisoned tunic for her husband; a more benevolent one taught Achilles and Jason the lyre. For 10 points, name this mythological race exemplified by Nessus and Chiron, which are half-human and half-horse.

ANSWER: centaurs

Result: 428 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 32422

Question: In the Odyssey, the Scherians possess a group of these objects that respond to their owners' thoughts, and Poseidon turns one of these objects to stone after Odysseus reached Ithaca. Homer notes that ten mouths and ten tongues would not suffice to describe a group of these things in a passage that doubles as a (*) list of the Greek commanders. A poem by Apollonius of Rhodes notes that one of them had a component that could speak prophetically because its material was taken from Dodona. King Aegeus committed suicide because his son forgot to change color of a part of these objects from black to white. For 10 points, name this type of vessel that Theseus used to return from Crete to Athens.

ANSWER: boats [or ships, accept more specific answers such as triremes]

Result: 429 | PACE NSC | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 32445

Question: Two ancestors of these animals drink from the Well of Urd. One of these creatures appeared after Achilles strangled an invincible Trojan on his first day at Troy. They circle a shrine in the Eridanos river in Hyperborea. Phaethon's best friend bore the Greek name of this creature and became one in grief. In a common Germanic folktale, their namesake "maidens" have magical (*) robes which get stolen by men as they bathe. Brahma's consort Saraswati has one of these creatures as a mount. The union between Tyndareus's wife and one of these creatures may have produced Castor, Pollux, or Helen. For 10 points, name this bird, in whose shape Zeus seduced Leda.

ANSWER: swans

Result: 430 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 41319

Question: This man was given the shield of Sir Torre after a woman gave him a token of a red sleeve embroidered with pearls to wear at a jousting tournament. After being wounded by a spear, this man was taken to the home of Baudwin and healed by the Fair Maiden of Astolat. This man rescued a daughter of King Pelles from a boiling water tub she had spent five years in. He discovered his true name in a cemetery after the Copper Knight fled from battle at Dolorous (*) Gard. This man was tricked into sleeping with Elaine of Corbenic. He went on the quest for the Holy Grail with his nephews Sir Bors and Sir Percival. His son successfully sat in the Perilous Seat and drank from the Grail. For 10 points, name this Knight of the Round Table, the father of Galahad and lover of Guinevere.

ANSWER: Sir Lancelot du Lac [or Launcelot of the Lake; prompt on "White Knight" or "Knight of the Cart"]

Result: 431 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 41693

Question: On pottery, this figure is depicted several times holding a branch with hares on it, symbolizing his role as a hunter. After Actaeon's death, this figure created an image of Actaeon to soothe his dogs. This figure was conceived when Cronus slept with Philyra. The Aloedae stacked the site of his home, Mount Pelion, on top of Olympus. After Pholus opened a jar of wine, a battle breaks out in which this figure was mistakenly wounded by an (*) arrow dipped in the Hydra's poison. He gave up his immortality to ease the pain caused by that wound, exchanging it for Prometheus's freedom. For 10 points, name this tutor of heroes, including Achilles and Heracles, and one of the few civilized centaurs.

ANSWER: Chiron [or Kheiron]

Result: 432 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 41706

Question: In one story, these people get revenge for being left on an anthill, as babies, by turning their elder stepbrothers into howler monkeys. In another tale, these people defeat a pair of demons through the use of a gypsum-coated roast bird and a fake crab; prior to that, they defeated the demons's father by stealing his jewelry and replacing his teeth with corn. In addition to humiliating the evil and vain demon (*) Seven Macaw, they passed through six nights of trials in the underworld, during which the elder was decapitated by a bat; however, even after that setback, they were able to defeat the Lords of Xibalba in a ballgame. For 10 points, name this pair of mythological brothers whose legendary deeds are described in the Popol Vuh.

ANSWER: Hunahpù and Xbalanqué [accept in either order; or the Mayan Hero Twins]

Result: 433 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 41734

Question: This man travels to Lake Avernus to get the protection of King Thesprotus. Hyginus recounts how this man is seized at Delphi and thrown into prison to await his death, until he recognizes the sword his would-be killer is holding. This man is tricked into giving up his throne when Zeus makes the sun move backwards in the sky. A literary work titled for him opens with a Fury summoning the shade of his grandfather Tantalus. (*) Seneca wrote a play about this man, who conspires with Aerope to seize the throne from his brother. He rapes his daughter Pelopia to seek revenge against a man who presented him with a platter bearing some severed hands and heads. For 10 points, name this father of Aegisthus whose sons were killed and served to him in a feast by his brother Atreus.

ANSWER: Thyestes

Result: 434 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 41745

Question: While a group of druids brew a potion, a youth sneaks a peek at them through a window and leaking fumes infuse one of these objects belonging to him, granting it the power to kill. That deadly example of these objects ultimately causes the death of a king whose epithet refers to his silver hand. Four men are required to veil and unveil one of these objects which, when attacked by Lugh with a sling, kills Balor. In order to placate Skadi, these possessions of Thiazi are turned into (*) stars. Two children of Izanagi are born from the washing of these objects. Drinking from the Well of Mimir requires Odin to sacrifice one of them, and Odysseus's men use a stake to pierce this body part of Polyphemus. For 10 points, name this organ, of which cyclopes possess only one.

ANSWER: eyes [or eyeballs; or obvious equivalents]

Result: 435 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 15 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 41767

Question: This object was created to win the favor of a virgin "from whose forehead shines the rainbow," although in the end, she did not marry its creator. Prior to its creation, a series of objects that were judged to be "ill-mannered" were accidentally created and then discarded, including a plough, a crossbow, a boat and a cow. An alternative interpretation views this item as a world pillar, as it grew roots into the earth after being buried beneath the hills of (*) Sariola. It provides an explanation for why the sea is salty, as it was lost at sea when Louhi defeated Ilmarinen. For 10 points, name this magical mill that could endlessly produce flour, salt, and money and whose creation is described in the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Sampo [or Sammas]

Result: 436 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 40424

Question: This figure once plucked out his nerves and used them to play a song praising the god he favored. After raping the nymph Rambha, he was cursed to have his head explode if he ever violated another woman. One of his brothers was a giant who would wake up every six months and eat everything in sight. This figure's son earned his name by capturing a storm god. In addition to his siblings Vibhisana and Kumbakarna, this man had a sister, (*) Surpanakha, whose nose and ears were cut off. Hanuman used his tail to light this rakshasa's city on fire. He utilized a golden deer as a distraction to kidnap Sita, the wife of Rama. For 10 points, name this demon king of Lanka, the antagonist of the Ramayana.

ANSWER: Ravana

Result: 437 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 40952

Question: During this event, Hylonome covers the body of her lover to prevent his spirit from escaping; unsuccessful, she kills herself to join her lover Cyllarus. During this event, Latreus insults a warrior who was originally a woman before Poseidon raped her and transformed her into a man. In the Metamorphoses, Nestor recounts how during this event, a bird emerged from a pile of tree trunks that were used to bash Caeneus into the earth. Eurytus sets off this event by trying to kidnap the daughter of Adrastus; he is then killed by (*) Theseus. This event erupts when wine brings out the savage nature of some cousins of Chiron attending the wedding feast of Hippodamia and Pirithous. For 10 points, name this battle between a Thessalian tribe and a half-human, half-horse race.

ANSWER: the battle of the Lapiths and Centaurs [or Centauromachy; or obvious equivalents mentioning both the Lapiths and Centaurs; or the wedding feast of Hippodamia and/or Pirithous until "wedding" is read]

Result: 438 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 40988

Question: In Egyptian mythology, the deification of the horizon, Aker, was depicted with two of this animal facing opposite directions. In one story, the hunter Anhur subdued one of these animals and made it his wife Mehit. Apollo fell in love with Cyrene after watching her wrestle one of them. The son of Ptah and Bast, Maahes, had the head of this animal. In the myth of the Distant Goddess, the Eye of (*) Ra took this form and was pacified after drinking beer dyed to look like blood. One of them was born to Selene and killed by Heracles as his first labor. After having sex in a temple of Cybele, Atalanta was transformed into this animal. The fierce goddess Sekhmet took the form of this feline. For 10 points, the Sphinx possessed the body of what large cat?

ANSWER: lions [or Sphinx until "Anhur" is read; prompt on "cat"]

Result: 439 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 41001

Question: This figure remarks that it seems as if Baldr has returned, after Odin calls him in response to a thundering noise in his halls, which turns out to be due to the death of Erik Bloodaxe. According to the Prose Edda, men with huge beards should be called by his name in honor of this god's long beard. In the Lokasenna, Loki accuses this god of cowardice, and then accuses this god's wife of sleeping with her brother's killer. That wife holds this god back from talking to Loki, and was held captive for a time by Thiazzi. A discussion between this god and (*) Aegir comprises the second section of the Prose Edda. Norsemen would swear oaths by passing around a cup named for this god, whose tongue bears runes carved by Odin. For 10 points, name this husband of Idunn who is the Norse god of poetry.

ANSWER: Bragi

Result: 440 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 41235

Question: This man's paternal grandfather was left to die at the hands of centaurs during a hunting competition with Acastus, whose sons this man killed after they deposed his grandfather. After a revelation made by Helenus, Odysseus retrieved this man from Scyros and together they fetched Philoctetes from Lemnos. He carried off Hermione (hur-MAI-nee) and was subsequently killed by Orestes. This son of (*) Deidamia was conceived during the time his father spent hidden in the court of King Lycomedes. After throwing Astyanax off the walls of Troy, this man killed Priam in a temple of Zeus and made Andromache his concubine. For 10 points, name this grandson of Thetis and Peleus who was the son of Achilles.

ANSWER: Neoptolemus [or Pyrrhus]

Result: 441 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 41254

Question: It is said that the blood of this figure made shrimps red. A myth explains that the sky is sometimes dark because this figure raised it with a poker out of anger. After capturing the smallest mud hen, this figure learned the secret of fire, which he obtains from the fingernails of another deity in a different story. He won his wife by using his phallus to defeat the eel Te Tuna. After his birth, he was wrapped in the hair of his mother (*) Taranga and thrown into the sea. He died when birds awoke Hina, whom this figure tried to crawl into in order to obtain immortality. This figure used a lasso made of his sister's hair to slow down the sun and the jawbone of his great-grandmother to fish up some islands. For 10 points, name this Polynesian trickster and namesake of a Hawaiian island.

ANSWER: Maui [or Maui-tiki-tiki-a-Taranga]

Result: 442 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 41261

Question: Eurytus's son Hippasus had his thigh cut during this event, after his opponent sharpened his weapons on an oak tree. During this event, a man prayed to Apollo to make his spear accurate, but another deity removed the spear's tip. Another participant in this event was killed after boasting about how he would do better than a girl. In addition to Mopsus and Ancaeus, other participants included Echion, who threw the first (*) spear; Telamon, who tripped over a tree root; and Jason, who accidentally killed a dog. At the end of this event, a man murdered his uncles Toxeus and Plexippus, prompting Althea to burn a log tied to her son's life and then hang herself out of remorse. For 10 points, name this event in which Atalanta and Meleager killed a creature sent by Artemis to ravage the countryside.

ANSWER: Calydonian Boar Hunt

Result: 443 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 41288

Question: An old woman attempts to dissuade two people from taking this action by relaying a warning to a louse, who travels inside of a toad, who travels inside of a snake, who travels inside of a falcon. A man ignores his friend's warnings to wear dirty clothes and no perfume when he does this to retrieve a pukku and mikku. Dumuzi hides with his sister Geshtinanna in order to avoid doing this. Clothes that turn into fruits help distract a demon that chases Izanagi after he takes this action to (*) see his wife Izanami. Inanna unclothes herself as she performs it in order to meet her sister Ereshkigal. Hermod takes this action in a failed attempt to retrieve Balder from Helheim. To revive Eurydice, this action was undertaken by Orpheus. For 10 points, name this action performed by Jesus between his death and resurrection.

ANSWER: descent to the underworld [or katabasis; or obvious equivalents of "descent to", such as visiting, going to, and travelling to; or Xibalba, Irkalla, yomi, Hel, Hades, or hell in place of "underworld"; or Helheim in place of "underworld" until it is read; or harrowing of Hell after "Jesus" is read]

Result: 444 | PADAWAN | 2014 | Round: Tiebreakers | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 41776

Question: This person observes carvings of Aegaeon crushing some whales, and of Doris swimming with her daughters, as he approaches an emerald-laden throne. A king of Liguria named Cygnus chose to dwell in lakes as a swan upon learning of this figure's fate. This man's sisters mourned until their tears turned to amber and their bodies turned into poplar trees. In one episode this man boils the blood of the Ethiopians, turning their skin black. The Earth appeals to the gods to stop the suffering this man causes during that episode, which ends with him (*) crashing into the Eridanus River after being struck by Zeus' lightning, and begins when he drops the reins of his father's horses and goes careening across the sky in the chariot of the sun. For 10 points, name this ill-fated son of Helios.

ANSWER: Phaethon [or Phaeton]

Result: 445 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 42058

Question: In Dares Phrygius, this hero met Calchas in Delphi and protested the elevation of Palamedes to high command. In Dictys Cretensis, this figure's dealings in a grove with Idaeus led to whispers that he was a traitor and he was killed while being restrained by Deiphobus. In both of those works, this hero was killed in a ploy involving a false marriage to (*) Polyxena. In Ovid's Metamorphoses, this hero strangled an enemy who turned into a swan after death; that enemy was Cycnus. This hero was moved by the embassy of a ruler who came into his tent in the last book of the work in which he also refused the embassy of his charioteer Phoenix, Ajax, and Ulysses to return to battle after a dispute over Briseis. For 10 points, name this commander of the Myrmidons, a Greek hero who slew Hector in Homer's Iliad.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 446 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42072

Question: In the Ramayana, Rama is taught to recite a hymn to a deity of this domain in order to gains strength to defeat Ravana. Priests of a deity of this domain would attempt to reach him by being tied to a stone pillar during the Raymi festival. A huge temple at Konark is dedicated to a deity of this type who is also known as Aditya. Two figures associated with this domain are shown dining on the hide of a slain bull in a (*) cult-scene showing the aftermath of the tauroctony. A place called the "navel of the world" is where a god of this type gave a man a golden staff to plant. A black stone was used to worship a god of this type promoted by Elegabalus in the Roman Empire, where a deity of this name was known as the "unconquered." The Inca celebrated this kind of deity as the father of their founder, Manco Capac. For 10 points, name this domain presided over by Surya, Inti, and Sol Invictus.

ANSWER: the Sun [or Sol until it is read]

Result: 447 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 42313

Question: According to Suetonius, a man called Favor hired for one of these events honouring Vespasian expressed shock that it cost ten million sesterces and said that it should be much cheaper since it could be held in the Tiber. The novemdialis festival occurs after these events that the Twelve Tables generally prohibited from ending inside the pomerium. For aristocratic families, the (*) heir of the central figure of these events gave a speech on the rostra and mimes would wear imagines or masks of the central figure's notable ancestors to imitate them. The Laudatio Iulae Amitae linking the ancestors of the widow Gaius Marius to the goddess Venus was delivered at one of these events. For 10 points, name these events, one of which ended in the Liberators being driven out of Rome after Mark Antony read the will of Julius Caesar.

ANSWER: Roman funerals [or Roman burials; Roman funeral orations; or Roman funeral processions; funus; or funera; prompt on "oration" and "procession" and variants thereof]

Result: 448 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 42343

Question: This man once confuses an eclipse with the sunset and orders his subordinates to create a funeral pyre to immolate himself, which he promised to do if he could not avenge his son in one day. When Eklavya was shown to have greater skill than this man, he was ordered to cut off part of his hand. Chitrasena taught this man how to dance, which came in handy when he was cursed by Urvashi to become a eunuch. This man defeated his greatest rival after that rival forgot an incantation and his chariot wheel got stuck in the mud; that rival was Karna. This figure was the only student of (*) Dronacharya who managed to shoot the eye of a bird in an archery test. This son of Kunti and Indra installed a flag depicting Hanuman on his chariot, which was driven by Krishna at the Battle of Kurukshetra. For 10 points, name this leader of the Pandavas and hero of the Mahabharata.

ANSWER: Arjuna

Result: 449 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 42353

Question: A 2007 stage adaptation of this tale, which ends with Athena and Hera making constellations, was directed by Mary Zimmerman. Vespasian was the dedicatee of an incomplete Latin version of this tale by Gaius Valerius Flaccus. The seer Idmon foresees his own death in this myth, in which a clod of earth is entrusted to Euphemus by a lake god who also receives a sacred tripod from a set of two. Absyrtus is cut into pieces by his (*) sister during an escape in this story. In the backstory setting up this storyline, Helle falls into the Hellespont while flying away from home with Phrixus. As told by the epic poet Apollonius of Rhodes, the protagonist of this story relies on Calais and Zetes to drive off harpies, then manages to yoke fire-breathing bulls in Colchis, where he falls for Medea. For 10 points, name this quest tale in which a team of heroes sail to recover the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: the Argonautica [accept answers indicating the quest of Jason and the Argonauts; accept answers indicating the quest for the Golden Fleece before "Golden" is read]

Result: 450 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 42366

Question: This figure turns Odras into a pool of water after tricking her into coming to the otherworld. After having sex with a god, she promises to have the magicians of the land remove the blood and kidneys of Indech. This figure recites a poem foretelling the end of the world after the Battle of Magh Tureid, before which she had a tryst with the Dagda. This figure's wounds are healed after she offers another figure three bottles of milk; before that event, she transforms into an (*) eel, a wolf, and a cow to hinder that figure. This figure appears as a bird to Donn Cuailnge (COOL-NEH), telling him to flee; that action begins the Cattle Raid of Cooley, during which this figure repeatedly confronts Cuchulainn. For 10 points, name this triple goddess of war and death in Irish mythology.

ANSWER: the Morrigan

Result: 451 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 42367

Question: This figure turns Odras into a pool of water after tricking her into coming to the otherworld. After having sex with a god, she promises to have the magicians of the land remove the blood and kidneys of Indech. This figure recites a poem foretelling the end of the world after the Battle of Magh Tureid, before which she had a tryst with the Dagda. This figure's wounds are healed after she offers another figure three bottles of milk; before that event, she transforms into an (*) eel, a wolf, and a cow to hinder that figure. This figure appears as a bird to Donn Cuailnge (COOL-NEH), telling him to flee; that action begins the Cattle Raid of Cooley, during which this figure repeatedly confronts Cuchulainn. For 10 points, name this triple goddess of war and death in Irish mythology.

ANSWER: the Morrigan

Result: 452 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 42395

Question: According to a hymn found by a University of Pennsylvania excavation at Nippur, these things are made "anxious" by the gaze of Enlil, who receives an epithet calling him a "great" one. The real-life Xuanzang tried to identify one of these places in Tamil Nadu as the dwelling place of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara. A Minoan goddess of the hunt who was considered the "Mother of" these places was adapted by the Greeks into Britomartis. Vayu attacked one of these places for a full year as Garuda defended it from wind. Before Midas was brought in, the music contest between Apollo and Pan was judged by the god of one of these named Tmolus, who is sometimes identified as an (*) oread. Sacred examples of them in Hinduism include Meru and Shiva's abode Kailash. For 10 points, name these locales exemplified by the Muses' home at Helicon, Trojan Ida, Cretan Ida, and the gods' abode, Olympus.

ANSWER: mountains [or mountain peaks; or hills; do not accept "volcanoes"]

Result: 453 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 42087

Question: An attempt to capture this creature is shown on the left of the Ardre VIII stone. An animal known as the "Sky-Bellower" is killed before going on a trip to slay this creature. After slaying this creature, one character takes nine steps before falling dead. An enchanter makes his drinking-horn impossible to finish after using magic to turn this creature into a grey (*) cat, which is why the cat was so heavy that one hero could barely lift if off the floor. An ox head is used to bait this creature by a hero who attempts to kill it with a hammer. This sibling of a giant wolf and the goddess Hel poisons the sea and sky at the end of the world. For 10 points, name this creature which is killed by and kills Thor at Ragnarok, a giant Norse snake that circles the world.

ANSWER: Jormungandr [or the Midgard Serpent; World Serpent; or obvious equivalents]

Result: 454 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42197

Question: When a hero from this ethnic group whacks a giant with a mace, he is stuffed into the giant's pocket before befriending him. White, red, and black horsemen serving a figure from this ethnic group's legends represent dawn, the sun, and midnight. A king from this ethnic group whose golden apples are eaten every night sends a hero to find the perpetrator after discovering a golden token of that creature. Traditionally, members of this ethnic group believed each house to be inhabited by a small grey-bearded poltergeist called a (*) domovoi. This ethnic group is the origin of stock heroes called bogatyrs, as well as an evil immortal sorcerer whose soul is hidden inside a needle inside an egg named Koschei and a witch named Baba Yaga. For 10 points, name this ethnic group whose member Igor Stravinsky immortalized the Firebird legend.

ANSWER: Russians [or Rus'; or East Slavs in general; or any specific East Slavic group such as Ukrainians or Belarusians or Ruthenians]

Result: 455 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 42212

Question: During their initiation to become sangomas, Zulu twasas must find a whole example these objects, which they keep in collections called dingaka. In a Biblical passage in which a lot of these objects are seen, a man is commanded to write "For Judah and his companions" on a stick. They're not pottery, but these objects are frequently found at the bottom of cenotes believed to have been used for religious purposes. When not shown as a dog, the (*) Aztec god Xolotl was typically depicted as consisting entirely of these objects, which were burned in order to reveal cracks for divination purposes in Shang-era China. A popular spiritual exclaiming "gonna walk around" was inspired by the discovery of a number of dry examples of these objects in a valley by Ezekiel. For 10 points, name these objects frequently found in catacombs and reliquaries.

ANSWER: bones [accept skeletons after "Biblical"]

Result: 456 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 42220

Question: This deity took a long rope, dipped it in mud, and flung the mud in all directions to speed up the completion of one task. As part of another task, this deity took several rocks of different colors from a river and reshaped them. This goddess is frequently depicted entwined with her consort, who is credited with inventing fishing and trapping. After a water god angrily smashed his head against a mountain, this goddess cut off the legs of a giant tortoise to use as a new pillar to hold up the (*) wall of heaven before using her serpentine body to block the resulting flood. When this this wife of the first of the Three Sovereigns was lonely, she created animals for six days before using yellow clay to craft humanity on the seventh. This daughter of the Jade Emperor is married to her brother, Fu Xi. For 10 points, name this Chinese creator goddess.

ANSWER: Nuwa [or Nu Gua; or Nyuwa; or similar Chinese variants]

Result: 457 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 42238

Question: In Book 5 of the Aeneid, while performing this task, King Acestes is shown to have great honor when an implement used in this task catches fire. Besides being an excellent skier, Ullr is noted to be a superb practitioner of this, which is the primary skill of a man who was bitten on the foot by a snake sent by Hera. A person skilled in this practice is asked to build a summer palace on Mount Kunlun in exchange for an elixir of immortality. Only one out of the ten original three-legged (*) sun-birds survived Houyi's use of this skill in Chinese myth. Odysseus and Diomedes recover another man skilled at this practice, Philoctetes, who slays another man who uses this skill to kill a son of Peleus. For 10 points, name this skill which Paris used to wound Achilles in the heel.

ANSWER: archery [or equivalents, such as shooting arrows or shooting bows; or stringing bows; prompt on "shooting" or "fighting" or "combat"]

Result: 458 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 42247

Question: The central event of a sama ceremony is the performance of this activity. Irish priest Neil Horan was defrocked for engaging in this activity in unexpected public venues. During Navratri, some people perform this activity using sticks called dandiya. The dwarf Apasmara is typically depicted in iconography of the tandava, an instance of this activity. Maidens called miko lead activities of this type called (*) kagura in Shinto. A form of this activity is done as a form of dhikr, or remembrance, by the Mevlevi sect. In his Nataraja aspect, Shiva is considered the "Lord" of this activity, a variety of which called a horah is often performed to the tune of "Hava Nagila." For 10 points, name this action, which members of the Zuni tribe perform to summon rain.

ANSWER: dancing [or dance; or whirling]

Result: 459 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 42254

Question: In Aeschylus's Seven Against Thebes, Hippomedon's shield bears an emblem of this being as he fights Hyperbios. Hesiod's Theogony claims that all wet winds except for the trio of Notus, Boreas, and Zephyrus come from this being, and tells this being's story before a list of Zeus's wives and seductions. This being, which was first spawned in Cilicia, used the Corycian cave for storage, from which Aegipan and Hermes managed to recover the (*) sinews that this being tore out of his greatest opponent. Several gods assumed the shape of animals after fleeing to Egypt to escape this being. According to Pindar, it is this creature, and not Enceladus, which has spewed fire since its burial under Mount Etna. For 10 points, name this being with a hundred snake heads, a child of Gaea and Tartarus which nearly defeated the Olympian gods and fathered several monstrous offspring with Echidna.

ANSWER: Typhon [or Typhaeon or Typhoeus]

Result: 460 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 42275

Question: After this man's death, a group betrayed by the herald Leos attempted to seize his kingdom; that group, the Pallantides, were his nephews. This man was jealous after Androgeus won a series of games he put on, then asked him to capture the Marathonian Bull. This man was instructed by an oracle to not loosen the wineskin until reaching the "heights" of his city. After visiting King Pittheus of Troezen and sleeping with his daughter Aethra, this man placed his shield, sandals, and sword (*) underneath a rock so that he could identify his son. This man fathered Medus with Medea, who attempted to poison a visitor to his kingdom until he recognized him as his son. This man died after that son didn't change his sails from black to white after killing the Minotaur. For 10 points, name this King of Athens and mortal father of Theseus, who died by jumping into his namesake sea surrounding Greece.

ANSWER: Aegeus

Result: 461 | Penn Bowl | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 42285

Question: This man convinced his mistress to wear a bunch of rings in order to prevent her from being disgraced. This man once wins a race by laying sprigs of holly in the path of the opponent's horses. This man assisted the blind man Morda in one task. He was responsible for stoking the fire underneath a cauldron that had to be stirred for one year and one day. This man turned into a pile of wheat, which was scattered by a hawk, after which he turned into a single grain that was eaten by a rooster. This man acquired his abilities from (*) three drops of a substance originally brewed for the ugly Morfran. This man was fished out of a river by Elphin, and his original name was Gwion Bach. For 10 points, name this Welsh bard with a name meaning "shining brow".

ANSWER: Taelisin

Result: 462 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 49593

Question: The deification of this object will be consumed by Skoll at Ragnarök. The ancestor of the Inca royal family was said to be a deity of this object named Inti. It is the symbol of the son of Hyperion, who is also father to Phaethon ("FAY-uh-tawn"). One deity of this object birthed three gods from a sword, and hid in a cave after a fight with her brother; that goddess is Amaterasu. Under the reign of Amenhotep IV, Egypt began monotheistic worship of a disk representing this object known as Aten. For 10 points, name this object presided over by the Egyptian Ra and the Greek Apollo.

ANSWER: Sun

Result: 463 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 49844

Question: Material from Dodona gave the gift of prophecy to one of these objects that rotted, collapsed, and killed a sleeping hero. In Norse mythology, one of these can be folded up like cloth, and another is made of the fingernails and toenails of the dead. These objects include Skidbladnir, Naglfar, and one from Greek mythology that sustained only minor damage from the Symplegades, a pair of clashing rocks. Set guarded one of these objects from Apep that carries Ra across the sky. Coins were placed into the mouths of the deceased to allow access to one of these objects operated by Charon. For 10 points, identify these vessels exemplified by the Argo.

ANSWER: boats [accept ships or barges]

Result: 464 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 49867

Question: The ergastinai were responsible for this action in preparation for the changing of the peplos during Plynteria, a festival in honor of Athena. Procne learned of Philomela's rape by Tereus after Philomela engaged in this activity. A woman skilled in this activity was transformed with aconite after her suicide. This was supposedly being done for Laertes's sake, but Melantho revealed to the suitors that Penelope has been doing this action during the day and reversing it at night. Athena ended a contest with a woman skilled in this activity by destroying her depiction of Zeus's infidelities. For 10 points, Arachne was turned into a spider due to her prowess in what art?

ANSWER: weaving [do not accept "spinning"]

Result: 465 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 50030

Question: This god's head and genitals were depicted on his eponymous quadrangular pillars, which were used as boundary markers, and placed outside gymnasia and houses. Worshipped as an Arcadian fertility god, he was born on Mount Cyllene to the eldest of the Pleiades and crafted a tortoiseshell into a lyre after stealing Apollo's cattle. An epithet of this son of Maia refers to how he lulled to sleep and slew the giant Argos. This psychopomp told Calypso to set his great-grandson Odysseus free, and gave Odysseus moly to resist Circe. His symbols include winged sandals, winged cap, and caduceus. For 10 points, name this Greek god of travelers and thieves, the herald of the gods.

ANSWER: Hermes [accept Hermes Argeiphontes; do not accept "Mercury"]

Result: 466 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 13 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 50051

Question: Two of this figure's siblings preside over funerals, and one those siblings is traditionally depicted as holding the ankh. This parent of the crocodile-headed Sobek is the lord of "red land", contrasted with his brother's "black land." This god's sister and wife is Nephthys. This god lost a boat race while using a stone boat, as his nephew's boat was only wood painted to look like stone. That nephew was Horus. After several invasions of this god's region by the Hyksos, he was viewed with increasing negativity due to his status as the god of foreigners. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of storms and chaos who killed his brother Osiris.

ANSWER: Seth

Result: 467 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 14 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 50081

Question: Izanami died giving birth to a god of this domain, Kagu-tsuchi. In Hindu tradition, one god of this domain mediates the Yajna ceremony. In Norse myth, this phenomenon is associated with the region of Muspellsheimr and its ruler Surtr. Leviticus forbids its use in a ceremony associated with Moloch. In order to show her devotion to her husband, the goddess Sati kills herself using this. It is associated with the god Agni, and in Greek mythology, a Titan who gave this to mankind had his liver pecked out daily by an eagle. For 10 points, name this phenomenon, embodied by a creature that is reborn from its own ashes, the phoenix.

ANSWER: fire [accept logical equivalents, like flames]

Result: 468 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 49625

Question: Palamedes placed this figure in his infancy in front of a plow to prove that his father was not actually insane. His father refused an offer of twenty oxen per guest as payment for hospitality, and then the two of them teamed up to punish their family's disloyal maids. This man sneezed loudly after his mother talked about her suitors, which she took to be a good sign. He had earlier found his disguised father in the house of the swineherd Eumaeus. Nestor's son Peisistratus gave him a chariot and horses, and accompanied him to the court of Menelaus, where he learned about a prophecy Proteus made. For 10 points, name this son of Penelope and Odysseus.

ANSWER: Telemachus

Result: 469 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 49633

Question: In a Shinto version of this event, the five Kotoamatsukami were present. In Norse mythology, this event was accomplished by three gods who took apart the body of their grandfather, the giant Ymir. In Chinese mythology, this event occurred upon the birth of an individual who spent 18,000 years in an egg, Pangu. Another one of these events sees Gaea emerge from a void of chaos and give birth to Uranus. One of these from Babylon is described in the Enuma Elis. In another version, God "hovered over the waters" before decreeing "let there be light." For 10 points, name this event, which in Judaism and Christianity, is done by God over the course of six days.

ANSWER: creation of the world [accept logical equivalents]

Result: 470 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 49657

Question: A half-brother of this figure won at the Panathenian Games before being murdered out of jealousy; that half-brother was Androgeus. This figure was conceived after an animal from Poseidon was not sacrificed as promised and seduced by a queen inside a wooden cow. That wooden cow was built by the designer of this creature's enclosure. Also known as Asterion, this beast received seven sacrifices every year from Athens. This creature's half-sister, Ariadne, gave a ball of string to Theseus which allowed Theseus to navigate out of the Labyrinth after killing this creature. For 10 points, name this Greek creature with the body of a man and the head of a bull.

ANSWER: the Minotaur [accept Asterion or Asterius until mentioned]

Result: 471 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 5 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 49682

Question: At Borobudur, this god is depicted in the third gallery along with Queen Maya and Maitreya in the Rupadhatu level, the world of forms. The Shri Rudram Chamakam is an extensive hymn dedicated to this god, and the holiest of his temples is Pashupatinath in Nepal. Harihara is the combined form of Vishnu and this god. Bhairava, his destructive form, contrasts with his dancing Nataraja form. His first consort was Sati, and he rides on the bull Nandi wielding a trishula. He drank some poison, making him blue, and has a destructive third eye. For 10 points, name this god whose wife Parvati lived with him on Mount Kailash, the "destroyer" of the Hindu Trimurti.

ANSWER: Shiva [accept reasonable equivalents like Shiv or Siva]

Result: 472 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 6 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 49746

Question: While journeying under the name Rigr, this god was said to have introduced social classes to humanity. Sometimes referred to as the "brightest of the gods," this god hatched the plan to cross-dress Thor. A son of nine mothers, this god owns a horse named Gulltopp, and was sometimes known as Gullintani due to his golden teeth. This Norse god will assemble the other gods before Ragnarok by blowing into Gjallarhorn, and will kill and be killed by Loki. For 10 points, name this Norse god who watches over the rainbow bridge, Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdallr [or Heimdali; accept Gullintani before mentioned]

Result: 473 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 49795

Question: Hljod ("HYOD") brought one of these things to make Völsung's conception possible. Gaia's wedding gift for Zeus and Hera was an item that created these objects found on Avalon. Idunn, a goddess of these, was turned into a nut to be carried back to Asgard. Hippomenes won a footrace after Atalanta kept getting distracted by these items. Atlas retrieved these items from the Hesperides for Heracles. American folklore celebrates Johnny Chapman, who created orchards of their trees. Hera, Athena, and Aphrodite fought over one labelled "for the fairest". For 10 points, name these fruits, one of which Eris threw to start the Trojan War.

ANSWER: apples [accept golden apples]

Result: 474 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 49809

Question: The period that this deity ruled over saw the sun destroyed by hurricanes and humans turned into monkeys. When god was in his wind deity form, he blew on the sun and moon to move them. He broke his vow of celibacy by drunkenly having sex with his sister, and he then immolated himself, causing his heart to become the morning star. Along with his twin, a god of fire and sickness, this god retrieved bones from the underworld, Mictlan, to create the human race. This deity has a Great Temple at Teotihuacan, and is the enemy of Tezcatlipoca. For 10 points, name this Aztec deity, whose name means "feathered serpent".

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 475 | Prison Bowl | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 49838

Question: The first pomegranate tree grew from this deity's blood after he was torn apart as a baby. His followers were imprisoned by King Lycurgus, which prompted this deity to take refuge with Thetis. He made King Lycurgus chop up his own son under the belief that his son was ivy. This god's kidnappers were turned into dolphins after failing to bind him with rope. Hestia gave up her throne on Olympus for this god, whose his mother died when she is tricked into looking upon the full glory of his father. As a result, his father Zeus sews him into his thigh until his birth. For 10 points, name this Greek god of wine and ecstasy.

ANSWER: Dionysus [accept Zagreus; do not accept "Bacchus"]

Result: 476 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Dartmouth A, Penn C | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 34574

Question: In the Aeneid, one of these figures takes the form of Calybe and appears in a dream to Turnus, persuading him to go to war. That one also enchants Queen Amata, making her prevent the marriage of Lavinia to Aeneas. Another one of these figures guards the gate of Tartarus with a whip. These figures struck the horse Xanthus dumb after he predicted the death of his master Achilles. One of them caused (*) Ascanius to kill the stag of Silvia, provoking a war between the Trojans and the Latins. They were created when the blood of Uranus fell onto the earth, and they pursued Orestes to Athens, earning the name the "Venerable Ones." Virgil claims that there are three of these figures, named Alecto, Megaera, and Tisiphone. For 10 points, name these avenging figures of Greek myth, seen as personifications of vengeance.

ANSWER: Furies or Erinyes (accept Eumenides, Semnai, or Dirae)

Result: 477 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Editors 1 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 34641

Question: A daughter of Achelous named Eurymedousa was seduced by Zeus in the form of this animal, and the gold-mining Indikoi were said to be this type of creature. A monster spawned in the Libyan desert from the Medusa's blood was known as the Mother of these animals. An Aesop's fable relates how Zeus once turned a greedy farmer into one of these animals. After Hera's jealousy of Aegina led her to send a (*) plague on her namesake island, Aeacus prayed to Zeus to transform these animals into people. Daedalus was discovered by Minas after solving a riddle involving one of these animals and a seashell, and a king who later assisted the drunken satyr Silenus was fed by a procession of these creatures as a child. A multitude of these animals also helped Psyche sort a mix of grains into separate heaps. For 10 points, name these insects which were transformed into the Myrmidons.

ANSWER: ants (prompt on things like "bugs" or "insects" if that's what ants are)

Result: 478 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Editors 2 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 34661

Question: One of this figure's sons is depicted with a wounded wrist in a painting by Polygnotus in the Lesche at Delphi. This figure purified Amphitryon of his blood guilt after the murder of Electryon. This figure's son Megareus battled against Eteoclus at the gate of Neïs, where Megareus was killed. This father of Lycomedes and Megara once claimed that "the whole breed of prophets certainly loves money," denying (*) Tiresias's suggestion that he was opposing the will of the gods. The suicide of his son Haemon led his wife Eurydice to kill herself. This figure clashed with Antigone when he ordered that the corpse of Polyneices be left to rot on the battlefield as punishment for treason. For 10 points, name this king of Thebes who offered the hand of his sister Jocasta in marriage to anyone who could free the city from the Sphinx, leading Oedipus to fulfill a prophecy.

ANSWER: Creon

Result: 479 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Editors 3 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 34681

Question: This figure learned how to sing and dance from Chitrasena, a skill that became useful when he spent a year as the eunuch Brihannala in the kingdom of Virata. This figure's son died because he knew how to enter the Chakravyuha battle formation, but did not know how to exit. He shot the eye of a moving fish while only looking at its reflection to win the hand of his wife. This figure avenged the death of (*) Abhimanyu by killing Jayadratha, and he helped Agni burn down the Khandava forest, receiving a chariot bearing the flag of Hanuman and the Gandiva bow in return. This favorite student of Drona killed Karna and shared his wife Draupadi with his brothers on the orders of his mother Kunti. For 10 points, name this Pandava and hero of the Mahabharata who receives advice from his charioteer Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita.

ANSWER: Arjuna (or Arjun)

Result: 480 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Editors 4 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 34702

Question: In the Kalevala, Kullervo transforms some cattle into wolves and these creatures, resulting in the death of Ilmarinen's wife. One of these creatures married Hwanung and gave birth to Dangun, the founder of the Gojoseon kingdom. Polyphonte fell in love with one of these creatures, resulting in the birth of Agrius and Oreius. The Arkteia festival at Brauron involved girls imitating these creatures to appease (*) Artemis. Although it is not a monkey, one of these animals named Jambavan served as an advisor to Sugriva, an ally of Rama. Ilmarinen builds a spear for Väinämöinen so he may slay one of these creatures named Otso; that one is often referred to as "honey-paws." A daughter of Lycaon who was transformed into one of these animals was the mother of Arcas by Zeus. For 10 points, name these animals exemplified by Callisto, who was placed among the stars as Ursa Major.

ANSWER: bears

Result: 481 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Harvard A, UVA B | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 34531

Question: In the Aeneid, Juno offers this deity the hand of the nymph Deiopea in exchange for his help. This figure ordered his daughter Canace to kill herself after she committed incest with his son Macareus. According to some sources, this deity is the son of a woman who was born as a foal, although others claim him to be a son of Hippotes. In some stories, this figure and his brother Boeotus were conceived when (*) Poseidon impregnated Arne while in the form of a bull. This deity is perhaps best known for giving a bag to a wanderer and telling him not to open it; ignorance of that command resulted in Eurus, Notus, and Boreas flying out of the bag and wrecking the ships belonging to Odysseus. For 10 points, name this inhabitant of a floating island and Greek ruler of the winds.

ANSWER: Aeolus

Result: 482 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Illinois A, Alabama, Yale B | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 33752

Question: According to Apollodorus, the eventual captor of these creatures sailed across the Aegean to a land near the Danube River where he drove the caretakers of these creatures to the sea. That man and his group engaged in battle with Bistonian soldiers that were later sent to recapture these creatures. These creatures dragged a young boy to his death, which in turn led to the city of Abdera being named for him. Two of these creatures are named (*) Podargos and Lampon. Some sources claim that these creatures were dedicated to Hera and set free in Argos, while others state that they were taken to Olympus and killed by wild animals sent by Zeus. The owner of these fire-breathing creatures was fed to them by their capturer. For 10 points, name these man-eating creatures that Eurystheus tasked Heracles with retrieving, which belonged to a Thracian king who shares a name with a Trojan war hero.

ANSWER: the mares of Diomedes (or anything to do with horses and Diomedes)

Result: 483 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Illinois B, Penn B | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 34545

Question: A shrine dedicated to this god was guarded by birds that shot darts from their feathers. This god tried to join the Trojan War to avenge the death of his son Ascalaphus at the hands of Deiphobus, but he was stopped by Athena. A son of this god was dragged to death by his horses after losing a chariot race to Pelops. This deity slew Halirrhothius as revenge for the rape of his daughter (*) Alcippe, resulting in the first murder trial in history. This deity was wounded in the thigh by Heracles after attempting to avenge the death of Cycnus. This god was trapped in a bronze urn for thirteen months by the Aloadae until being freed by Hermes. Hephaestus used a net to catch Aphrodite in bed with this figure, who was often accompanied in battle by Deimos and Phobos. For 10 points, name this Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares (accept Mars)

Result: 484 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Michigan A, MIT A | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 34390

Question: This figure created the first dogs after cutting off the heads of the elderly Tata and Nene and putting them on their rears. The Toxcatl ritual involved the sacrifice of a boy who impersonated this figure for a year; at the end of the year, the boy's skull would be put on display and his flesh was eaten by the nobles of the city. This figure, also identified with Tepeyollotl, kidnapped the goddess of (*) flowers, Xochiquetzal, from her husband Tlaloc. This deity lost his foot after he used it as bait for the crocodile Cipactli. This god was overthrown by his greatest rival while ruler of the world of the first sun, after which he turned into a jaguar. This figure carried a magic mirror that gave off smoke, and had a piece of obsidian as a foot. For 10 points, name this Aztec deity, the rival of Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca

Result: 485 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Penn A, Louisville | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 33729

Question: One goddess of this place was a child of Zeus and Carme that invented hunting nets, and another figure from this place was mistakenly murdered by his son Althaemenes, fulfilling an oracle. In addition to Britomartis and Catreus, another figure from this place was cuckolded by the usurper Leucus and promised to sacrifice the first thing he saw on the beach when caught in a storm. One creature located in a city here had the alternate name (*) Asterius, while another creature circled this area thrice daily and protected Europa. The Curetes made lots of noise to drown out the sounds of infant Zeus, who was raised on Mt. Dicte in this area. Daedalus fashioned a bull costume for Pasiphae, the queen of this place, and eventually escaped from this island after fashioning wings. For 10 points, name this island home to king Minos, the Labyrinth, and the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Crete

Result: 486 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: UVA A, Minnesota, Northeastern A | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 34508

Question: This figure tricked Rhun into cutting off the finger of a maid in order to save the reputation of his master's wife. This man defeated Heinin Vardd in the court of Maelgwyn by casting a spell that caused Vardd to pucker his lips and speak gibberish. This figure won a race by dropping twigs of holly, which caused his opponent's horses to stop running and dance. He took the form of a hare, a fish, and a (*) grain of wheat, after which he was eaten by a hen. This man gained wisdom by drinking three drops of a liquid that was originally brewed for the hideous Morfran. Originally known as Gwion Bach, this figure was so beautiful at birth that Ceridwen could not bring herself to kill him; instead, she put him in a basket and threw him into the sea. He was raised by Elphin, who gave him a name meaning "radiant brow." For 10 points, name this legendary bard from Welsh myth.

ANSWER: Taliesin (accept Gwion Bach before mention)

Result: 487 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Washington, Dartmouth B, GW A | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 34614

Question: One being in this myth system lost some of his power after the Elders plucked out his pupils, and one race of people in this mythology had their heads lopped off by vampire bats after they failed to recognize the power of their creator, the Heart of Heaven. One place in this mythology can only be accessed after crossing a river of scorpions, a river of blood, and a river of (*) pus. A woman in this system was impregnated when a decapitated skull spat on her, and the resulting children used a crab to lure the prideful demon Zipacna to his death. Figures in this myth system include the Bacabs, the Camazotz and Seven-Macaw, and it contains an underworld called Xibalba. For 10 points, name this mythology recounted in the Popol Vuh that describes stories of K'iche' people and includes tales of the Hero Twins.

ANSWER: Mayan (accept K'iche' before mentioned)

Result: 488 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: WUSTL, Haverford, Bellarmine A | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 34588

Question: This man became the leader of his group after killing the repeated arsonist of Tara, Aillen. This man invited Diarmuid to a boar hunt and refused to save him as he lay dying. This man may have been killed at the Battle of Gabhair while grieving his grandson Oscar, and his son supposedly fled the battle and relayed the story to the Bishop of Armagh. This figure's son was taken to (*) Tír na nÓg, where he lived for three hundred years, immediately transforming into an old man upon his return. Three sounds of this man's hunting horn will supposedly wake this father of Oisín ("aw-sheen") to defend his country. As a boy, this figure burned his fingers while helping his mentor Finnegas cook the Salmon of Knowledge. For 10 points, name this legendary Irish warrior and leader of the Fianna.

ANSWER: Finn MacCoul (accept either underlined name; or Fionn mac Cumhaill ("fin ma-kool"); or Finn McCool; or Fingal; or Deimne; or Find mac Cumail; or Finn mac Umaill; do not accept "Cumhaill" ("kool"))

Result: 489 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Yale A, OSU A | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 34399

Question: The Black Madonna of Czestochowa represents one of these beings. A family of these beings are known for a dance called the "banda" and for consuming hot peppers and cheap cigars; that family represents the powers of death and fertility and are called the Ghede. One of these beings is represented by the palm frond and is involved in the (*) kanzo rites, while another of them opens and closes the doorway of communication between humans and these entities. They are used as intermediaries between worshippers and the creator deity, Bondye, and they include in their ranks one who wears a top hat, black tuxedo and dark glasses. For 10 points, name these entities that include Ayizan, Papa Legba and Baron Samedi, the spirits of Haitian Voodoo.

ANSWER: Loa (or Lwa)

Result: 490 | SUBMIT | 2014 | Round: Yale A, OSU A | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 34412

Question: According to Book III of Virgil's Georgics, this group invented the bridle bit and horseback riding. This group of humans is rebuked by Apollo on the west pediment of the Temple of Zeus at Olympia. These people included Phlegyas, who burned down a temple of Apollo after his child had an affair with Ischys. This group once fought beside an invincible warrior who was nonetheless crushed by a pile of logs. The sex-changed hero (*) Caeneus defended these people, who were led by a man who pushed his father-in-law into a fire and sexed up a cloud during an attempted rape of Hera. Drunken insults of Hippodameia from guests led a wedding organized by these people to get violent. They include the wheel-bound Ixion and a poor sap who got stuck on a chair in the underworld after his friend Theseus got out. For 10 points, name this northern tribe once led by the prince Pirithous, who warred with the centaurs.

ANSWER: Lapiths (prompt on "Thessalians" or "people from Thessaly")

Result: 491 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 37855

Question: Helen was performing this action when Polyxo's servants dressed as the Erinyes and killed her. King Cocalus ordered the death of Minos while Minos was performing this action. Hermes acquired a sandal because its owner was busy performing this action. The Danaids are punished in Tartarus by perpetually having to prepare for this action. Siproites was turned into a woman after viewing this action, which in some versions Tiresias was blinded for observing. Upon encountering Artemis performing this action, a man was turned into a stag and killed by his dogs. For 10 points, name this action whose viewing caused the death of Actaeon, which was often performed by Aphrodite in the river Achelous because water is central to it

ANSWER: bathing

Result: 492 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 1 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 37874

Question: This group was responsible for temporarily replacing Dadhichi's head with a horse's head as punishment for gaining knowledge of the immortality-granting substance Madhu vidya. These gods had honey instead of blood and can fill a hundred jars of honey at will. These gods are the progenitors of Nakula and Sahadeva, the horse experts in the Mahabharata who comprise Madri's contribution to the Pandavas. As representatives of dawn and dusk, these gods are considered the brothers of the dawn-goddess Ushda. For 10 points, name these Vedic patrons of surgery and healing, who are twins.

ANSWER: the Ashvins [or the Ashvin twins]

Result: 493 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 38076

Question: This Greek deity is believed to be identical to the character identified as "si-to-po-ti-ni-ja" in early Linear B inscriptions. This goddess took on the epithet "raging" after giving birth to a horse and to Despoina. A ritual performed for this deity remembered her application of ambrosia and fire, which was interrupted by a confused mortal. This deity was warmly housed by Celeus after taking on the guise of Doso, but was interrupted by Metanira when she attempted to apotheosize Demophon. This goddess ate the arm of Pelops and made the ivory replacement. This dedicatee, along with her daughter, of the Eleusinian Mysteries went to the underworld to retrieve Persephone. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of the hearth.

ANSWER: Demeter

Result: 494 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 10 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 38084

Question: A holiday honoring this god followed three days of extinguished fire and fasting with nine days of feasting, and was known as his Raymi. This god was worshipped by the drinking of chicha, which was brewed by the mamakuna who served him. This god gave his children a golden wedge, which was used to test the ground for the proper place to build a capital. Great political power was held by this god's chief priest, the Willaq Umu, who was the younger brother of the Sapa Inca. This god was the brother of Mama Quilla and the son of Viracocha. For 10 points, name this Incan sun god.

ANSWER: Inti

Result: 495 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 11 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 38098

Question: On the shield of Achilles, the depiction of adolescents carrying off fruit from a vineyard is accompanied by one person making use of this object. A person who was known for great skill with this object gave a mysterious scary item to Pelops and built the first altar to Hermes. A person who was noted for using this object was borne to Teanarum by a dolphin after a greedy ship crew threw him overboard. This object was used by Amphion to construct the walls of Thebes. This object was used to kill Linus by Heracles, and by Apollo in a contest with Marsyas. The Siren who did not sing or play the flute played this instrument. For 10 points, name this musical instrument played in ancient Greece, which had seven strings.

ANSWER: lyre

Result: 496 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 12 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 38117

Question: Pompey's Pillar marks one former site of devotion to this god, whose main temple was destroyed by Theophilus in 391. A statue of this deity was stolen from Sinope on the orders of the mysterious "unknown god," after which both the reigning Eumolpidae and Manetho pronounced the identity of this deity. The central statue of this god had an object on his head identified as the modius, a basket used to apportion grain. This god was depicted with Cerberus at his feet and was the father of Harpocrates. This god's worship was encouraged as a syncretic practice in the 310s BCE, and his main cult center was in Alexandria. For 10 points, name this main god of Ptolemaic Egypt.

ANSWER: Serapis

Result: 497 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 2 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 37890

Question: In a 1969 story, this character shut down a gang of female hippies who forced beating victims to wear dog collars, known as THEM! In a 2009 storyline, this character faced off against Felix Faust and T.O. Morrow's creation Genocide, who sent this character's friend Etta Candy into a coma. This character's original foes included the Earl of Greed and Duke of Deception, and her modern arch-nemesis is the evil cannibal archaeologist Barbara Minerva, who uses the identity The Cheetah. This hero had an ongoing rivalry with Doctor Cyber during the era when she was a karate champion instead of having superpowers, which was protested by Gloria Steinem. For 10 points, name this character who also squares off against Circe, Ares, and other Greek mythology-themed opponents, as she is an Amazon from Themiscyra who is the most prominent female superhero in the DC universe.

ANSWER: Wonder Woman [or Diana]

Result: 498 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 3 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 37914

Question: Prior to one festival in this city, two priestesses carried baskets of unknown contents to a shrine and exchanged them for second set of mysterious baskets. This city held a male beauty contest called the euandria. This city's two ugliest men were whipped and stoned to death in its Thargelia festival. Four children would spend nine months creating a gigantic tunic in this city, which would then be hung from the mast of a wheeled ship and placed on a wooden statue. During that procession, this city's foreign residents, or metics, carried cakes and honey. At one of this city's festivals, amphorae of olive oil were given to the winners of chariot and boat races held between its ten tribes. For 10 points, name this city whose namesake festival is portrayed on its Parthenon frieze.

ANSWER: Athens

Result: 499 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 37924

Question: These animals were trapped by digging a trench to create an island, and the effort needed to capture them led to the founding of a city where Anacreon lived. These creatures ate from brass vessels and were the offspring of Ares and Cyrene. They were responsible for the death of Abderus and were named Dinus, Lampon, Podargus, and Xanthus. The king of the Bistonians owned these creatures, which were retrieved from Thrace and presented to Eurystheus following that kind being fed to them. For 10 points, name these man-eating horses which were captured as the eighth labor of Heracles.

ANSWER: the mares of Diomedes

Result: 500 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 4 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 37929

Question: A similarly named object which spanned a feature with this name provided the only light that a character saw in nine days of riding. A feature with this name is spanned by a gold-thatched bridge, which is where Modgud detained Hermod. That feature with this name is ice-cold and full of knives, and separates Hel from the rest of the realms and was crossed during the attempt to retrieve Balder. Another feature of this name was connected by Gelgja to the more famous cord Gleipnir. An object named for this feature is the horn which will be blown by Heimdall at Ragnarok. For 10 points, give this name of the river around Hel in Norse mythology, which is also the name of the stone slab to which Fenrir was bound.

ANSWER: Gjoll

Result: 501 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 37984

Question: This man's son is killed with a chain shortly after wounding Cairbre. This man first met his father during a fight over a pig, or was found naked at age seven on Benbulbin. This hero allegedly encountered Saint Patrick shortly after his death in a roadbuilding accident. This man is so named because the druid Fer Doirich turned his mother Sabdh into a deer. This man became the father of "the flower of women" Plur na mBan after travelling to Tir na Nog with his wife, Niamh of the golden hair. This man ages three hundred years after falling off the magical horse Embarr. For 10 points, name this son of Finn mac Cumhail who is the narrator of the Fenian Cycle and was the attributed author of several hoax poems by James MacPherson.

ANSWER: Osian

Result: 502 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 7 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 37997

Question: The French proverb that the real form of this figure "is the one who gives you dinner" and the French term "Sosie" meaning a look-alike both come from a Moliere play about this figure. He was assisted in one task by a woman who had the ability to catch everything that she pursued. He lost a kingship after throwing a club at a herd of cattle. With the help of Procris and Cephalus he resolved a problem with a fox that was hounding Thebes. He bested one foe by having that foe's daughter pluck out her father's golden hair, rendering him no longer immortal. This man was appointed king so that his uncle could avenge the death of his sons at the hands of the Teleboans, but accidentally murdered Electryon. He was the father of Iphicles, the younger of the two sons of his wife Alcmena. For 10 points, name this stepfather of Heracles.

ANSWER: Amphitryon [or Amphitruo]

Result: 503 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 8 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 38021

Question: This character was the subject of the lost third poem of Robert de Boron. This hero was raised in an isolated forest until age fifteen by his mother Dindrane. This character is chastised for remaining silent during a meal by the loathly lady, shortly after he proposes marriage to Blanchefleur. This character fails to ask why the lance bled, the healing question to the Fisher King, after spotting a grail. This hero is the father of a man who travels in a boat pulled by a swan and warns Elsa never to ask him his name, Lohengrin. For 10 points, name this Arthurian knight and subject of a Wolfram van Eschenbach epic.

ANSWER: Perceval [or Parsifal, etc.]

Result: 504 | VCU Open | 2014 | Round: 9 | Question: 22 | Mythology | AmericanID: 38063

Question: A god who took this form was offered two sacrifices who floated on a calabash, but was unable to accept them, and had to be propitiated in order to build embankments. A god who took this form crushed the bones out of a creature for failing to retrieve a monkey's liver. A god who took this form was the father of Otohime and through her the grandfather of emperor Jimmu. That god who took this form used three jewels to control the tides. A god who took this form was to receive Kushi-inada-him as a sacrifice, but she was turned into a comb and this god was defeated by Susanowo. For 10 points, name this form of Japanese deities and monsters such as Mizuchi, Ryjin, and Yamata no Orochi.

ANSWER: dragons [or serpents; prompt on snakes]

Result: 505 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: CalTech A | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 35480

Question: The Aztec one of these gods was the dedicatee of the month of Panquetzaliztli, and warred with the Four Hundred Southerners shortly after his birth, brought about by his mother's impregnation by a ball of feathers. That son of Coatlicue was also responsible for the creation of the moon when he killed his sister and threw her head up into the sky, and was known as the "left-handed hummingbird." In addition to Huitzilopochtli, these figures include one who raped a daughter of King Numitor of Alba Longa, fathering a pair of twins on Rhea Silvia. Those twins were suckled by a wolf before founding Rome. For 10 points, name these gods that include Mars, who loves combat.

ANSWER: war gods [Accept anything related to battles or fighting. Accept Huitzilopochtli before mention.]

Result: 506 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Caltech A | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 44985

Question: The Aztec one of these gods was the dedicatee of the month of Panquetzaliztli, and warred with the Four Hundred Southerners shortly after his birth, brought about by his mother's impregnation by a ball of feathers. That son of Coatlicue was also responsible for the creation of the moon when he killed his sister and threw her head up into the sky, and was known as the "left-handed hummingbird." In addition to Huitzilopochtli, these figures include one who raped a daughter of King Numitor of Alba Longa, fathering a pair of twins on Rhea Silvia. Those twins were suckled by a wolf before founding Rome. For 10 points, name these gods that include Mars, who loves combat.

ANSWER: war gods [Accept anything related to battles or fighting. Accept Huitzilopochtli before mention.]

Result: 507 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Chattahoochee | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 35506

Question: In a fight, this god was accidentally hit by a harpoon thrown by his mother, who instructed the weapon to let him go and strike his enemy instead. A symbolic marking representing one part of this deity had pieces that added up to 63/64, with the last piece being magically restored by Thoth. This figure once tricked another deity into eacing lettuce covered in his semen, and also beat that rival in a race when he painted his boat to look like it was made of stone. This wadjet-eyed god avenged his father, who was chopped up by Set and scattered all over the Nile. For 10 points, name this son of Isis and Osiris, a falcon headed Egyptian god whose eyes represented the sun and moon.

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 508 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Dartmouth A | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 35535

Question: In a myth from this country, several sharks are tricked into lining up so that a hare may hop across them to reach an island. A dragon from this country eats one of a couple's daughters every year until a hero slays it after getting it to drink liquor from vats in several gates, after which he pulls a legendary sword from its body. This country's sun goddess hid in a cave after her brother threw a flayed horse into her room, forcing another to dance naked in order to make her laugh. According to legend, this country's emperor is descended from Jimmu, himself the descendant of Amaterasu. For 10 points, name this country believed to be populated by kami, the spirits of the Shinto religion.

ANSWER: Japan [Accept Nippon or Nihon.]

Result: 509 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Haverford | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 35553

Question: This figure inhaled the poison from his spear to keep himself awake during one of his battles. During a hunt, this figure's hounds refused to attack a red deer, which instead followed him back home before turning into a beautiful woman. In his old age, this slayer of the fairy Aillen and husband of Sadhbh betrothed himself to a daughter of Cormac mac Airt named Grainne, who fled from him with her lover Diarmuid under the protection of Angus. This warrior gained the wisdom of the world when he accidentally sucked his thumb while cooking the Salmon of Knowledge. For 10 points, name this Irish hero and father of Ossian who led the Fianna.

ANSWER: Fionn mac Cumhaill [or Finn MacCool]

Result: 510 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: LASA A | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 35585

Question: This man took over the rulership of Tiryns from a man who would later kill him to avenge the death of Proetus, Megapenthes. This man's visit to Ethiopia resulted in the creation of coral after he laid a certain object on the ground, and later he made his foster-father Dictys the king of Seriphos. At the funeral games in Larissa, this man accidentally killed his grandfather Acrisius with a discus. He escaped the wrath of Stheno and Euryale by the use of Hades' helm and the winged sandals of Hermes after accomplishing his greatest feat, which resulted in the birth of Pegasus and indirectly led to his marriage to Andromeda. For 10 points, name this son of Danae who killed Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 511 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Maryland B | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 35617

Question: One account of this figure's birth tells fish pushing an egg out of the Euphrates. In the Iliad, this figure's mother is Dione, to whom she goes for consolation after Diomedes wounds her in battle. After sleeping with Dionysus, this goddess became the mother of Priapus. A story from The Golden Ass relates how this goddess had her daughter in law retrieve a box of beauty from Persephone. Zeus gave this deity to Hephaestus as wife, and she caused the Trojan War when she offered a shepherd the most beautiful woman in the world in exchange for a golden apple. For 10 points, name this goddess born from the blood of Uranus, the mother of Eros and the Greek goddess of love.

ANSWER: Aphrodite [accept Venus until "Dionysus"; do not accept or prompt thereafter]

Result: 512 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Michigan A | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 36260

Question: One of this man's daughters bribed an oracle to advise her husband Athamas to sacrifice his son Phrixus, who fled on a golden ram. This figure was succeeded by Pentheus, the son of his daughter Agave. Wondering how valuable a serpent could be to the gods, this man himself turned into a snake while ruling in Illyria with his wife, who was a daughter of Aphrodite and Ares. This husband of Harmonia was sent by his Agenor to search for a girl who had been abducted by Zeus in the form of a bull, but an oracle instructed him to follow a cow to a place where he killed a dragon and sowed its teeth in the ground. For 10 points, name this brother of Europa who founded Thebes.

ANSWER: Cadmus

Result: 513 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Northmont | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 36291

Question: In the Orphic tradition, this goddess was seduced by Zeus and gave birth to Zegreus, who was later reborn as Dionysus. The swineherd Eubuleus lost his pigs when a chasm opened in the earth to make way for chariot drawn by black horses carrying this goddess. She turned Minthe into a mint plant to prevent her husband from seducing her, and her mother visited the home of Triptolemus while searching for her. This goddess was ambushed while picking flowers at Eleusis, and after eating some pomegranate seeds, she was forced to spend part of the year in the Underworld with her abductor Hades. For 10 points, name this daughter of Zeus and Demeter, the goddess of spring.

ANSWER: Persephone [prompt on Kore; do not accept "Proserpina"]

Result: 514 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Ottawa A | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 36308

Question: One of these objects was turned to stone by Poseidon to punish the Phaeacians for helping Odysseus. Agamemnon cursed Cinyras when he sent him 49 of these, explaining the absence of Cyprians at Troy. One of these objects was created by the sons of Ivaldi and could be folded up and kept inside Freyr's pocket. In addition to Skidbladnir, these objects included one called Naglfar that was made of the nails of the dead. An angry Achilles refused to fight the Trojans until the ones belonging to him were in danger, and Homer gave a lengthy catalogue of them in Book II of the Iliad. For 10 points, name these vehicles that carried the Greeks to Troy across the Aegean Sea.

ANSWER: ships or boats [accept any reasonable equivalents]

Result: 515 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Rice | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 36334

Question: One figure in this myth system proclaims that his "teeth just glitter with jewels, and turquoise as well." Later on, two boys manage to replace all of that trickster's teeth with corn, leading him to die of hunger. This myth system's explanation for earthquakes involves Zipacna and Cabrakan being trapped in a cave and a mountain, respectively. In this mythology's best known story, the protagonists survive the Bat House of Camazotz as well as a house full of flying knives as they travel to the underworld to defeat One Death and Seven Death in a ball game. For 10 points, name this myth system that venerates the Hero Twins, whose journey to Xibalba is described in the Popul Vuh.

ANSWER: Mayan mythology

Result: 516 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: St. John's | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 36360

Question: Eurylochus is the only man who escapes one of the actions of this figure. Canens threw herself into the Tiber river after this figure changed her husband Picus into a woodpecker. To eliminate a rival for the love of Glaucus, this figure poisoned a pool in order to change Scylla into a sea monster. This daughter of Helios gave birth to Telegonus following the visit of a hero who was left with only one ship encountering the Laestrygonians. That man resisted her tricks by eating the herb moly, which prevented this woman from turning him into a pig like all of his crew. For 10 points, name this sorceress of Aeaea, where Odysseus lived for a year during his return from Troy.

ANSWER: Circe

Result: 517 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Stanford A + Maryland A | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 36378

Question: Hylas, a member of these people, was abducted by naiads when they visited the Cius River. A woman associated with them killed the bronze man Talos, and this group was forced to wait in Phaeacia while two people were married by Alcinous. Earlier, they were purified of the murder of Absyrtus, son of King Aeetes. Apollonius of Rhodes wrote an epic about these people, who came together to assist their leader in completing a quest for his uncle Pelias. This group escaped the Sirens thanks to the music of Orpheus, and other members included Meleager and Heracles. For 10 points, name this group of Greek heroes who helped Jason retrieve the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Argonauts

Result: 518 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Stanford B + Chicago A | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 36406

Question: This woman tricked her husband into killing Euryalus, his son from an affair with Evippe. Her second marriage was to her stepson, whose mother also married this woman's son in a double marriage. Every night for three years, she unraveled the funeral shroud she had been weaving for her father-in-law before being betrayed by Melantho. This woman was harassed by a group of 108 people led by Antinous who abused xenia and were shocked to see a beggar shoot an arrow through twelve axe-rings. This daughter-in-law of Laertes was forced to defend her home for twenty years while her husband was away at Troy. For 10 points, name this queen of Ithaca, the wife of Odysseus.

ANSWER: Penelope

Result: 519 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Washington A | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 36437

Question: In the guise of Grimnir, this figure was given water by Agnar while testing the character of Agnar's father Geirrod. Valakjalf, which is built of solid silver, is the location of this god's seat of Hlidskjalf, from which Freyr once looked out and was cursed into falling in love. The insubordination of Brynhild caused this god to lock her in a wall of fire. He possesses Geri and Freki, two wolves, whom he feeds all of his food because he consumes nothing but wine. He once gave up his right eye to Mimir in order to drink from the Well of Wisdom, and owns a spear named Gungnir that never misses its target. For 10 points, name this ruler of the Norse pantheon, known as the Allfather.

ANSWER: Odin [accept Wotan]

Result: 520 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Wellesley | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 36447

Question: This figure helped Taygete, one of the Pleiades, to escape from Zeus' pursuits by changing her into a doe with golden antlers. Because that doe, which lived in Cerynitia, was sacred to this deity, Eurystheus sent Heracles to hunt it so that she would be angry with him. Born on Mount Cynthus, this deity came to Aulis to replace Iphigenia with a fawn just as Agamemnon tried to sacrifice her. When this goddess was caught bathing by Actaeon, she turned him into a stag, leading to him being devoured by his own hounds. With Apollo, she assisted in killing Niobe's twelve children for insulting her mother Leto. For 10 points, identify this Greek goddess of the hunt and the moon.

ANSWER: Artemis [prompt on "Diana"]

Result: 521 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Yale A | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 36484

Question: After receiving three serious wounds while fighting his best friend in Armorica, this knight died on the beach of Dover. This man stood up in the middle of a procession of a bleeding spear, a cup, and a platter to ask what it all meant, lifting the curse on the Waste Land. In another story, this man married the ugly Lady Ragnell, who turned out to be a beautiful woman under a spell. This son of Morgause and Lot had brothers named Gaheris and Gareth, and in his most famous adventure he traded the kisses of his host's wife for food after hacking off another man's head. For 10 points, name this nephew of Arthur who befriended the Green Knight.

ANSWER: Sir Gawain

Result: 522 | ACF Fall | 2013 | Round: Yale B | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 36506

Question: In Welsh myth, Arawn became angry when Pwyll mistreated some red-eared ones of these animals that belonged to him. In order to end a paradox concerning the Teumessian Fox, Zeus turned one of these animals to stone, though he had originally gifted it to Europa. One of these animals from Norse mythology lived in Helheim, was fated to kill Tyr, and was named Garm. One that lived in Ithaca died after seeing Odysseus come home and was named Argus. Another of these animals was captured by Heracles for his twelfth labor and guarded the entrance to the realm of Hades. For 10 points, name these animals whose mythological examples include the three-headed Cerberus.

ANSWER: dogs

Result: 523 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: AlbertaDartmouth | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 38237

Question: This work is subject to the Brasseur de Bourbourg ordering because known texts of it lack punctuation. Seminal vignettes in this work include the impregnating of the daughter of a local lord by a skull which spits into her hand; the creation of gods through a crop gathered by animals; and a heavy deluge of resin, which wipes out the first men, who lacked souls or minds. In another of its stories, a head is placed in a Calabash tree after the first heroes are executed for making noise to offend the Lords of Xibalbá by playing their ball game. For 10 points, name this book transcribed by Francisco Ximenez which relates the exploits of Hunahpú and Xbalanqué, the Maya Hero Twins.

ANSWER: Popol Vuh [or Popol Wuj]

Result: 524 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: BerkeleyRice | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 38270

Question: An inscription at Magnesia on the Maeander indicates that at least some of these people trace their descent from Ino, who became the sea goddess Leucothea. Persecution of them in Edonia was the ultimate cause of the downfall of its king Lycurgus after he developed a murderous aversion to ivy. A hazy association with wool spinning gives this group the alternate names of Mimallones and Klodones, used by Plutarch. Their characteristic objects include the bassaris and thyrsus, the former of which lends them the alternative name Bassarides, or fox skin-wearers. A group of them from Ciconia practiced their characteristic rituals of omophagia and sparagmos on a sun-worshiping demigod near Mount Pangaion. Responsible for the deaths of Pentheus and Orpheus, for 10 points, name these roving bands of female followers of Dionysus, who will tear you to pieces and eat you.

ANSWER: Maenads [or Bacchae; accept Mimallones or Klodones or Bassarides]

Result: 525 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: CheyneAuroniCarson | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 38288

Question: This entity is watched over by the flapping eagle Hraesvelg and served by the chronically lazy servants Ganglati and Ganglot. A linen smock and the ring Draupnir were found here by the bearer of the staff Gambantein. Outside this location is a bridge thatched with gold and guarded by the maiden Modgud. It is either a sub-realm of or contains a hall called Eljudnir and is encircled by a stream stemming from Hvergelmir known as Gjoll. For 10 points, name this realm to which Hermod was sent, a cold region guarded by Garm and home to the youngest offspring of Angrboda.

ANSWER: Helheim

Result: 526 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: ChicagoAMarylandPennB | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 38302

Question: This entity created the guards of Mashu and Kurnugi, those guards being flawless bowmen known as the aqrabuamelu who have the lower parts of scorpions. This being was deserted by the vizier Mummu and piqued at the murder of Lahmu and Lahamu, leading to the assemblage of the army of 11, including Basmu and Ugallu. The power of the 11 winds led to the defeat of that army, and this goddess herself, and the recovery of the Tuppi Shimati by the champion of her rival, Ea. This personification of the primordial ocean took the form of a multi-headed dragon. For 10 points, name this consort of Kingu and forger of the Tablets of Destiny, which would be taken from her by the Babylonian hero Marduk.

ANSWER: Tiamat

Result: 527 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Editors 1 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 38343

Question: This entity and Hersir are the great-grandfathers of a person whose crow-given quest for the rich Dan and Danp has unknown result. This being's grandchildren like Lazybones, Fatty, Strongbeard, and Prettyface, were born to Thir, Snor, and Erna, his daughters-in law, the last of whom bore the namesake father of the aforementioned Konr the Younger. This deity practiced the same trick on Ai and Edda, Afi and Amma, and another couple, sleeping between them to surreptitiously impregnate. A child who was later given this god's name resulted from the three days spent with Moder; that probable progenitor of the Danes was originally named Jarl, and was born to rule over his half-brothers, Thrall and Karl. This Norse god thus fathered the three races of men in the guise of Rig. For 10 points, name this god whose complex family relations include his being the son of nine mothers.

ANSWER: Heimdall [accept Rig before it's mentioned]

Result: 528 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Editors 3 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 38365

Question: In The Raw and the Cooked, Claude Levi-Strauss describes how instances of this phenomenon prompt the people of the Yukon to turn over cooking receptacles. In Fon mythology, they signal bouts of lovemaking of Mawu and Lisa. In Hindu belief, these phenomena are produced by the body and immortal head of a decapitated asura, respectively known as Ketu and Rahu. In Norse myth, some of these phenomena occur when Arvak and Alsvid run too slowly, placing a daughter of Mundilfari in danger from Sköll. In Shinto myth, one these events ended when Uzume's dancing lured Amaterasu out of a cave, returning light to the world. For 10 points, name this type of event, exemplified at Ragnarok by two wolves swallowing Mani and Sol, or the moon and sun.

ANSWER: eclipses [accept lunar eclipses before "head"]

Result: 529 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Editors 4 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 38396

Question: In the Argonautica, this person is reminded that Echetus put spikes through the eyes of his own daughter Metope, and that Nycteus and Acrisius were cruel to their daughters Antiope and Danaë; that speech from this man's wife sways him to promise not to return his guest to Aeëtes. Thus, this man's court on Drepane sees the hasty wedding of Medea and Jason. In another work, this ruler's palace is on Scheria, where he employs the blind minstrel Demodocus, whose songs about Achilles and the Trojan Horse upset another of his guests. For 10 points, name this husband of Arete and father of Nausicaa, a king of the Phaeacians who hosts Odysseus.

ANSWER: Alcinous [or Alkínoös]

Result: 530 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Editors 5 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 38474

Question: In the Song of Harbaror, Thor recounts being assailed by bewitched women near this being's home. This figure has the alternate name Hlér in a story that describes him as a skilled magician who attends a festival and listens to the tales of Thiazi's abduction of Idun and the creation of the Mead of Poetry. In the Poetic Edda, this deity commissions Thor and Tyr's expedition to obtain the Kettle of Hymir, but his servant Fimafeng is murdered and his guests insulted by Loki. His home is floored with gold, which is known as this god's fire, because it increases the light when he has his fellow Æsir over for his yearly mead parties. For 10 points, name this husband of Rán and father of the nine wave maidens who is, like Njord, a Norse sea god.

ANSWER: Ægir [accept Hlér or Hlésey before Hlér's mentioned; prompt on Gymir]

Result: 531 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Editors 7 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 38746

Question: This being tells a guest the story of obtaining a magical treasure from a gigantic man and his wife after the couple escaped from an iron room that became white-hot. This person presides over an eighty-year-long feast in Gwales known as the Assembly of the Noble Head. He assembles armies after receiving a specially trained starling carrying a letter about one of three unfortunate slaps. Earlier, he gave away a cauldron, a measure of silver, a gold plate, and numerous horses in recompense for the mutilation of the horses of his brother-in-law, Matholwch. After hearing of his sister's plight, he wades across the sea to Ireland, leading a fleet carrying his half-brother Efnisien and his full brother Manawydan. For 10 points, name this gigantic king of Wales in the Mabinogion.

ANSWER: Bran the Blessed [or Bendigeidfran]

Result: 532 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Editors 8 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 38975

Question: One story says this deity was offended that the hermit Jappan left his family to make a home in the desert, so this deity got him turned into a scorpion by seducing him. The Florentine Codex claims that she slept with the planet Mercury, in his form as the solar deity Piltzin-tecuhtli. She wears a headdress with two spindles of cotton when she goes by the epithet Ixcuina, which hints at her origin as a Huastec goddess from the coastal region. Her most famous son was Centeotl, the god of maize, and she's capable of splitting into four sisters of different ages. She invented the sweat bathhouse called the temescal, which makes sense since she's a purification deity who absolves those who commit adultery. Often depicted with a bunch of black bitumen around her mouth, for 10 points, name this Aztec deity known as the "Eater of Filth."

ANSWER: Tlazolteotl [prompt on the "eater of filth" before mentioned]

Result: 533 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Editors2 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 38325

Question: When members of this group work in teams of two, the more senior one is termed a Zaotar, while the junior assistant is called a Raspi. All members of this group are qualified to perform the jashan ceremony, used to commemorate major events such as wedding anniversaries. Members of this group who have obtained the title "Dastur" are also qualified to resolve legal disputes. Senior members of this group are the only people allowed in the pavi, a sacred space marked off by grooves in the floor. These people may carry a barsom, a sacred bundle of rods. In their primary role, they use silver tongs to place offerings into the Atash Dadgah, especially on holidays called Gahambars, such as Nowruz. For 10 points, name these clerics who conduct services inside of a Fire Temple, often by reciting the Avesta.

ANSWER: Zoroastrian Priests [or Atharvan; or Magi]

Result: 534 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Editors2 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 38332

Question: One of these entities led an old woman out of a doomed city after a child mischievously rubbed red dye into the eye of a tortoise. Another of these beings killed both the inventor of weapons and a river-drinking foe; that one is responsible for chasing the sun, is propitiated in times of drought, and has a name meaning Responder. The so-called Nine Offspring of these carry out functions like carrying heavy objects, crying, and litigating; consequently, structures serving those purposes were decorated with them. Nuwa met a black one on his quest after he chopped off a tortoise's but before he collected ash reeds. A group of them live in underwater crystal palaces and represent the North, East, South, and West Seas; those are the four "kings" of these creatures. For 10 points, name these usually benevolent creatures from Chinese mythology where they representing the only mythic member of the zodiac.

ANSWER: Chinese dragons [or long]

Result: 535 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 38988

Question: Two answers required. In Albanian lore, one of these two creatures evolves into the bolla, which only opens its eyes once a year and devours any man it sees at that time; the other of these creatures gave its strength to the hero Shqiptar. In Sumerian myth, Utu tells the first of these creatures to hide in a bull's corpse to trap the second of these creatures, who is freed by Etana. In Hindu myth, immortal beings who resemble one of these two animals are the children of Kadru; their enemy, who resembles the other of these two animals, is the son of Vinata. In Norse myth, examples of these two animals exchange insults via Ratatosk. For 10 points, Garuda and the Nagas resemble what two animals, which appeared on a cactus in a sign from Huitzilopochtli to the Aztecs?

ANSWER: snakes and eagles [accept in either order; prompt on birds for eagles]

Result: 536 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 39213

Question: An old woman holding a gold chalice places three fingers on this figure's shoulder in a Hendrik Goltzius painting where she's sleeping. Girodet's treatment of this figure includes a fat turkey intended to lampoon the model's husband, Michel-Jean Simons, and was originally a more traditional portrait of Mademoiselle Lange. In 1986, a Lithuanian named Maigis poured acid on one work depicting this figure in the Hermitage Museum; that work contains a winged golden statue who clasps its hands above this figure and was painted by Rembrandt. Titian's multiple depictions of this figure includes one where Eros stands to her right, and another where an old maid holds up a sack to collect falling valuables. A highly erotic representation of this figure shows her in a fetal position wrapped in a purple veil and was painted in 1907 by Gustav Klimt. For 10 points, name this woman commonly depicted as Zeus impregnates her as a shower of gold, the mother of Perseus.

ANSWER: Danae

Result: 537 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: GeorgiaTechNYU | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 39470

Question: One person with this name was a progenitor of the royal house of Libya whose descendants founded Cyrene; that woman with this name is the daughter of Tityas and mother by Poseidon of Euphemus, the Argo's helmsman. The best-known figure with this name has the Homeric epithet "far-famed" in the Iliad, which does not recount her fondness for saffron crocuses. Her confused family includes possible mothers Argiope, Cassiopeia, or Telephaassa, while Homer and Hesiod both attribute her father not as Agenor, but rather as Phoenix, who is in other sources her brother. For 10 points, name this Princess of Tyre who was given a faultless javelin, the dog Laelaps, and the bronze man Talos after she was taken to Crete by a bull.

ANSWER: Europa

Result: 538 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: IllinoisCarleton | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 39484

Question: Bahá'u'lláh recorded the legend that Balinus derived his knowledge from this figure. Maimonides mentions a group of Sabians, the Harranians, who accept this entity as their prophet. "The father of all perfection in the whole world is here" begins a notable translation of one text ascribed to this person, The Emerald Tablet. A now-lost dialogue between this figure and Aesclepius was criticized by Augustine. Some Islamic sources syncretize this person with Enoch as the prophet Idris. This mythical figure was re-introduced to western thought by Marsilio Ficino, who held that he was probably an Egyptian priest; that view persisted until Isaac Casabaun debunked the antiquity of the writings ascribed to him. His nickname refers to the belief that he was the greatest king, the greatest philosopher, and the greatest priest. For 10 points, name this figure, who wrote a series of ancient wisdom texts that inspired Hermeticism.

ANSWER: Hermes Trismegistus [or Thrice-Blessed Hermes; accept Idris until mentioned; prompt on Hermes]

Result: 539 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: LondonWUStL | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 39525

Question: One of these entities was romantically pursued by Tyro, who was tricked into instead sleeping with Poseidon, resulting in the births of Pelias and Neleus; that one is called Enipeus. Another of these beings had nine daughters including Thespia, Thebe, and Corcyra, who were abducted by four gods. That one of these may be a syncretization of Phliasian and Boeotian progenitors, as all are named Asopus. Another one of these deities has the alternative name Xanthos and fought alongside the Trojans after figures like Lycaon covered it with blood. For 10 points, name these children of Oceanus and Tethys, one example of which that fought Achilles was named Scamander.

ANSWER: river deities

Result: 540 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: MITGMUMinnesota | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 39645

Question: One attendant of this being is the eternal foe of Horme; that guardian of this entity is a daughter of Aethir and Gaia known as Aergia. This deity's consort was the Kharite Pasithea, whom he was granted by Hera. He double-teamed Okenos with his brother Phobeter, one of the Oneiroi. Because of an aversion to hinges, this god chooses to live in a cave. In one myth, this god, usually portrayed as a wing-templed and sometimes bearded youth, falls in love with Endymion, granting him an unusual power related to his chief role. For 10 points, name this god who dwells near the Lethe and is served by his brothers Phantasos and Morpheus in his job as the Greek god of sleep.

ANSWER: Hypnos [or Somnus]

Result: 541 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: MSUOttawaSouthCarolina | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 39628

Question: This figure's wife once held the lungs and heart of an enemy Hualla in her mouth, allowing him to defeat Copalimayta. Proving his origin by wearing a dress made of shiny silver and gold plates, this demigod banned incest, but still married his sister Cello. A variant tale of this figure has him oust and murder his three brothers, all named Ayar; in common with most tales about this figure, that variant has him emerge from Pacaritambo with the tapac-yauri. He and his companion Mama Huaco tested the softness of ground by casting a golden wand; after traversing some caves, this man founded a sun temple and eventual city where the rod sank. For 10 points, name this mythological man, usually consider the son of Inti and founder what is now Cuzco as the mythological first Inca.

ANSWER: Manco Cápac

Result: 542 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Northwestern | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 39690

Question: This deity may have had a feminine aspect named Khwashkhwarrik. The priest Zatspram is known for being an adherent of this god. The realm in which this deity lived may have been called Vayu, also the name of an older air god. This god's followers are divided into three groups, including the fatalists, who believe that all matter is evil, and the Zaniks, who believe that all creation comes from this god. After being tricked, this god fulfills a promise by granting his son 9,000 years of kingship. This figure spent a thousand year making sacrifices, after which both his piety and his doubt were rewarded with twins  one good, one bad. For 10 points, name this supreme being from Zoroastrianism, the neutral father of Ahriman and Ahura Mazda.

ANSWER: Zurvan

Result: 543 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Northwestern | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 39695

Question: In one story, this figure named Sciron the King of Megara, thus gaining his first wife, who was jealous of this figure's second wife, who in turn became a seal to avoid him. The birth of this person's mother was finally disclosed only when Sisyphus was sent a stream. This man's wife Endeis was so jealous of his son by Psamathe that she and her stepsons conspired to kill that son, Phocus, at the pentathlon. After a dragon got past a wall built by this man, it was prophesied that Troy would fall at the hands of this man's descendants. This man's sons include Telamon and Peleus. A group of warriors loyal to this man eventually served Achilles. For 10 points, name this son of Zeus and Aegina who led the Myrmidons and became a judge of the underworld alongside Rhadamanthus and Minos.

ANSWER: Aeacus

Result: 544 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Penn A Harvard Stanford | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 39936

Question: In the Eiriksmal, this deity and Odin discuss the arrival of Eric Bloodaxe. This deity relates how Odin used the drill Rati to trap the giant Suttung in a hole. In the Loksenna, Loki accuses this deity's wife of being man-crazed after claiming that this god murdered that wife's brother; Loki also rejects this deity's peace offerings of an arm-ring, sword, and horse. In the Skaldskaparmal, this deity has a discussion with Aegir that involves the nature of the heiti. Oaths were sworn over this god's cup, which kings would drink from before ascending the throne. This son of Odin has runes carved on his tongue and was married to the guardian of the golden apples, Idunn. For 10 points, identify this bard, the Norse god of poetry.

ANSWER: Bragi

Result: 545 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: RutgersColumbia | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 40096

Question: One sacred text of this mythos is The Krater attributed to Zopyros, which is thought to have compared the title bowl to the source of souls. Other texts ascribed to this belief system include The Net and The Robe. Bone plates from Olbia featuring opposites like "life" and "death" may be the first evidence of a self-identifying community of this religion's practitioners. The Derveni fragment purports to explain several features of one of the theogonies of this religion, including the shaper of the universe, Protogonos or Phanes. Like Pythagoreanism, this religion practiced vegetarianism due to belief in metempsychosis. This religion had a soteriology tied to the "loosening" powers of a deity, who was eaten as a child by the Titans, thus creating human souls. Associated with a belief in the salvific power of Dionysos, for 10 points, identify this mystery religion of ancient Greece named for a mythic poet.

ANSWER: Orphism [or Orphicism; or Orphic Cult; or Cult of Orpheus; prompt on Bacchic cult or Dionysiac cult or similar answers before Dionysos is mentioned; do not accept "Pythagoreanism" or similar answers]

Result: 546 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: VCUMichigan | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 40114

Question: In latter days, this group became the blue-lanced and white-shielded Aes sidhe. An analog of this band's namesake is the consort of Beli; another progenitor of theirs is Nemed the Scythian. Eventually displaced by the Milesians, this tribe's members had such epithets as Ollathir, Airgetlám, and Lámhfhada. Goibniu, Creidhe, and Luchta are the craftsmen of this group, which used such artifacts as Slane, a magic well, and Gae Assail, a perfect spear. The victors at the battles of Maige Tuired against the Fir Bolg and Fomorians, this group was led by the silver-handed Nuada, until he was killed by Balor and replaced by Lugh. For 10 points, name this people of the goddess Danu, the fifth set of deities to invade mythological Ireland.

ANSWER: the Tuatha Dé Danann

Result: 547 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Virginia and Ohio State | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 40135

Question: One person sometimes said to be here is punished by having to eternally cut down an infinitely-renewing Cassia tree and is known as the woodcutter Wu Gang. Some stories of escape to this location center on a malign apprentice known as Feng Meng, who wishes to steal the boon of Xi Wangmu or a related item. This site serves as a second place of exile for a careless, porcelain-jar-breaking servant in another story. Almost all explanations of the origin of this location's ruler pivot on a pill or elixir of immortality, possibly mixed by a jade rabbit also said to serve in this area and accidentally taken by a woman who was originally married to Houyi, an archer who downed nine superfluous suns. For 10 points, name this body inhabited by the goddess Chang'e in Chinese myth that is the celestial embodiment of the yin, which is cold and variable.

ANSWER: Chinese moon [accept Chang'e before read]

Result: 548 | ACF Nationals | 2013 | Round: Yale | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 40206

Question: A manuscript found in this god's temple provides the source material for the tablet that describes Geb's division of Egypt between two younger gods; that tablet is the Shabaka stone. Steles for this god often featured carved ears to better allow him to hear prayers. Sometimes depicted as a mutated dwarf, he fathered a beautiful god who wears a blue lotus headdress. Other offspring of this god include the retributive Mahes and the man who designed Zoser's pyramid at Saqqara, the architect Imhotep. In one story, this god fashioned Ramses II's body out of electrum. After this deity was syncretized with Seker and Osiris, he carried the "was" staff, the ankh, and the djed. Married to the lion-headed Sekhmet, he had periodic incarnations as the Apis bull. This green-faced god of craftsmen was the head of the Ennead of Memphis. For 10 points, who is this Egyptian human-form deity who created the world with his thought?

ANSWER: Ptah [or Pteh; or Peteh]

Result: 549 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Bellarmine + Chicago A | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 35448

Question: This god was portrayed by the king in a mock battle taking place throughout the twelve-day New Year's festival of Zagmuk. According to one account, he proved his power by commanding a constellation to disappear and reappear. He owned four horses known as "the fleet", "the trampler", "the merciless", and "the destroyer". This four-eyed, four-eared son of Damkina was worshipped at such temples as Esagila and Etemenanki. This god tamed the mushussu dragon and later gave it to his child by Sarpanitu, a god of wisdom and writing named Nabu. During his most famous accomplishment, he recovered the Tablet of Destinies from the breastplate of Kingu after using a net, eleven winds, and an arrow to kill a primordial ocean goddess who threatened the Annunaki. The rise of this killer of Tiamat was detailed in the Enuma Elish. For 10 points, name this chief god of Babylon.

ANSWER: Bel Marduk [or Marutuk; or Merodach; or Amar-utu; or Meridug; or Mardochaios]

Result: 550 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Bellevue + Michigan A + Georgia Tech | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 35460

Question: One of this man's daughters was trampled to death by horses on the orders of her jealous husband Ermanaric. An old man helped this figure select a horse at the river Busiltjörn. One myth describes him as a prince of Xanten whose only weakness is a spot on his back where a linden leaf had landed. He killed one foe after hiding in a trench dug to catch that figure's blood, a taste of which caused him to learn the language of the birds. This grandson of Eylimi and son of Hjordis was eventually killed by Guttorm. He owned Grani and inherited sword fragments from his father, which were reforged by his foster father Regin. This man married Gudrun after a magical ale allowed him to forget Brynhild, but may be most famous for using his father's sword Gram to kill the dragon Fafnir. For 10 points, name this Norse hero of the Volsung Saga, the son of Sigmund.

ANSWER: Sigurdr [or Siegfried; or Sivard Snarensven; or the noble hart (if you are Fafnir)]

Result: 551 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Dartmouth A + DCC + VCU A | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 38176

Question: This figure's manner of death was very similar to that of the Delian prince Thasius, son of Anius. Pausanias claimed to have been shown a rock near Vergoutiani known as this man's "bed." His parents left his native city and went to Ereneia and Ceos after his death. In one version of this figure's myth, he meets his fate after challenging Zeus for the affection of Semele. The most famous story of this son of Autonoe and Aristaeus, related by Callimachus, notes that his punishment only took effect after he responded to a call issued by his hunting party. This man died on Mount Cithaeron not long after unluckily encountering Artemis bathing in a spring. For 10 points, name this mythological hunter who was transformed into a stag and eventually devoured by his own dogs.

ANSWER: Actaeon [or Aktaion]

Result: 552 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Editors 1 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 38191

Question: One of this figure's consorts was Otrera, the daughter of the east wind Eurus. He rescued his daughter Alcippe by killing her would-be rapist Hallirhothius. He was wounded after attempting to avenge the death of one of his sons, who had been killed while trying to add Heracles to his temple of skulls. During the Gigantomachy, this father of the Macedonian Cycnus was imprisoned in a bronze jar by Otus and Ephialtes. Another of his children was the Ismenian dragon slain by Cadmus during the founding of Thebes; Cadmus later propitiated this god by marrying his daughter Harmonia. He turned Alectryon into a rooster after the youth's sleepiness led to Helios discovering this god's affair with Aphrodite. Phobos and Deimos accompanied this son of Zeus and Hera into battle. For 10 points, name this Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares [accept Mars until "Greek" is read]

Result: 553 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Editors 2 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 38226

Question: One of this god's sons drowned while visiting Frode when he slipped and fell into a vat of mead. This owner of the horse Blodughofi was attended by Byggvir and Beyla and received the realm of Alfheim as a teething gift. One account details how his aforementioned son Fjolnir succeeds him as king in Uppsala, where he was also known as Yngvi. This god defeated Beli with an antler after giving his magic sword, which fights all by itself, to his servant Skirnir in order to help woo the giantess Gerd; unfortunately, this leaves him weaponless at Ragnarok, where he is killed by Surtr. He arrived at Baldr's funeral on his golden boar Gullinbursti, and he also traveled on his folding ship Skidbladnir. This member of the Vanir was the son of Njord. For 10 points, identify this Norse fertility god, the brother of Freya.

ANSWER: Freyr ["Frey" or "Freyr", but not "Freya"]

Result: 554 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Illinois A + Dorman + Wellesley | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 38386

Question: In the Celtic romance The Voyage of Mael Duin, the title warrior's crew becomes intoxicated by a maiden on an island with four of these entities made out of gold, silver, copper and crystal. Some of these entities were created by the sons of Zeus and Antiope; according to that story, the struggling Zethus was aided in making them by the magical lyre-playing of his brother Amphion. In a Norse myth, an anonymous hrimthurs offered to create one of them in exchange for the sun, the moon, and Freya, but was killed by Thor after Loki distracted his horse Svadlifari. Poseidon and Apollo sent a sea monster and a plague to attack Troy after Laomedon refused to pay them for constructing another of these objects. For 10 points, identify these common defensive structures which surrounded both Asgard and Troy.

ANSWER: walls

Result: 555 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: LASA A + UVA B | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 38414

Question: This deity once defeated a magician by adopting a form with five faces in order to simultaneously blow out five candles. In another story, he cunningly manipulated his size to escape from a sea monster who'd captured him by seizing his shadow. He was once sent to retrieve the medicinal herb Sanjivani, but ended up returning with an entire mountain. His attempt to eat the sun was foiled when his jaw was smashed by Indra's thunderbolt. The birth of this son of Anjana and Kesari was facilitated by Vayu. He first appears as a minister of Sugriva in the Sundara Kanda, wherein he delivers a signet ring to a captive woman after leaping to Lanka. He then wreaks havoc by swinging his burning tail around and killing many of Ravana's warriors. For 10 points, name this vanara who aided Rama in rescuing Sita, a monkey god of Hindu mythology.

ANSWER: Hanuman

Result: 556 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: MIT A + LASA B | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 38453

Question: In one story, one of these items is taken by King Nidhad's men and given to Bodvild after earlier being duplicated seven hundred times by its owner, Wayland. In Egyptian myth, Nemty had his talons cut off after accepting one of these items as payment for ferrying a disguised Isis. One of these items that appears in the Volsung Saga was used to cover a whisker, thus completing a reparation payment given to Hreidmar for the death of Otr. Another of these objects was retrieved by Hermod from Baldr's funeral pyre, where it was placed by his father. The former of those objects was cursed by its owner after Loki tricked him out of it, while the latter generates eight copies of itself once every nine nights. For 10 points, Andvaranaut and Draupnir are both what type of jewelry, an invisibility-granting example of which was worn by the Lydian king Gyges on one of his fingers?

ANSWER: rings [or arm rings; or arm bands; prompt on "bracelets"]

Result: 557 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Northwestern A + Hunter | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 38478

Question: This city was semi-led by Archbishop Simon Atumano during the 13th century, when the Navarrese and Catalan companies feuded over during the great mercenary wars in 13th-century Greece. One of this city's kings was deserted by his supporters and then forced to make an agreement with Ptolemaeus of Alorus. That king of this city controlled Larissa as a way to antagonize Alexander of Pherae. Pelopidas was a military leader from this city, which received help from the Arcadians in a battle against Agesilaus II that led to the death of its great general, Epaminondas. Though it dominanted Greece after successfully using the phalanx at the Battles of Mantinea and Leuctra, this city was destroyed when Philip II of Macedon defeated its army at Chaeronea. For 10 points, name this ancient Greek city state defended by the Sacred Band home to the mythical Oedipus.

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 558 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Northwestern A + Hunter | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 38492

Question: In Bon weddings, a priest presents a bride and groom with turquoise and gold, then all three of them participate in this activity. Guanyin pisses off the king of the Land of the Dead by performing this activity. After boasting about his prowess in this activity, Thamyris lost his memory and was maimed. In the Kalevala, a competition in this activity follows a battle atop sledges and a contest of wits and results in Joukahainen being sunk in a bog by the victor, Vainamoinen. In Greek mythology, a severed head performs this activity while floating down the Hebrus despite having been separated from the rest of its body by crazed Maenads. Odysseus has himself tied to his ship's mast and employs beeswax in order to safely observe the Sirens doing this without dying. For 10 points, name this musical activity that, like playing the lyre, was perfected by Orpheus.

ANSWER: singing [or synonyms]

Result: 559 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: NYU A + MSU + Caltech A | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 38509

Question: This figure is associated with the war god Wepwawet, since both are considered the "Opener of the Ways." He, like the earlier deity Imiut, carried a fetish made of a stuffed animal skin tied to a pole terminating in a lotus bud. In one story, this wielder of the Was scepter and the Ankh defeated the nine bows, or traditional enemies, thus earning the epithet "ruler of the bows." This deity's snake-headed daughter had a name meaning "cooling water" and was a goddess of freshness and purification. This father of Kebechet and husband of Anput is assisted by Thoth's baboon form A'an in determining whether a soul should go to Aaru or be eaten by Ammit by weighing it against the feather of Ma'at. Various stories claim him to be the son of either Osiris or Set and their sister Nephthys. For 10 points, name this jackal-headed Egyptian god of embalming.

ANSWER: Anubis [or Anapa; or Anpu]

Result: 560 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Penn A + Chicago B | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 38536

Question: One member of this group had a pair of sons who were depicted on the throne of Amyclae and were named Anaxias and Mnasinas. Some stories claim that they invented a ritualized banquet to which the gods were invited known as the theoxenia, while ancient Greek sailors associated them with Saint Elmo's fire. In one adventure, they were aided by the informer Academus, after which they set up the usurper Menestheus on the throne and abducted Phisadie and Aethra. In another story, they married the Leucippides after killing Lynceus and Idas. One of them defeated the Bebrycean king Amycus in an athletic contest during their time with the Argonauts. Known for their skill as horsemen and boxers, they were raised by Tyndareus and, after one of them died, agreed to split their immortality. Their sisters were Clytemnestra and Helen of Troy. For 10 points, identify these sons of Leda, a pair of twin warriors.

ANSWER: the Dioscuri [or Castor and Pollux; or the Gemini; or the Castores; accept Polydeuces for "Pollux"; accept the Tyndarides until "Tyndareus" is read; accept the Leucippides (or Hilaeria and Phoebe) until "banquet" is read; prompt on "the Argonauts" or "the children of (Zeus or Tyndareus and) Leda"]

Result: 561 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Rice A + Columbia A | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 38603

Question: This figure sees such portents as a snake crawling out of his father's tomb and his son's head catching fire. Ovid described how this man's mortality was washed away by the river god Numicius. In one episode, this man is enraged by the sight of a stolen belt decorated with a scene of the Danaids' murdered husbands. Zeus's desire to protect the line of Dardanos led to Poseidon briefly switching sides to protect this character from Achilles. He fathered Silvius with his second wife, whom he married shortly before defeating an army led by Mezentius, Amata, and Turnus. His katabasis was aided by the Cumaean Sibyl, who tasked him with finding a golden bough. This son of Anchises was originally married to Creusa, with whom he fathered Ascanius. For 10 points, name this Trojan prince who abandoned Dido in order to complete a journey to Italy in a namesake epic poem by Vergil.

ANSWER: Aeneas [or Aineias]

Result: 562 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Rutgers-NB + St. John's A + Haverford | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 38643

Question: This god once shot an arrow into the middle of a field, which he set on fire after sending his future son-in-law in after the arrow. Later, that son-in-law tied this deity's hair to the rafters while escaping his palace with his daughter. One story tells how this god created five other deities from the chewed-up fragments of a necklace. This god rescued the eighth daughter of a pair of earth deities by turning her into a comb, then intoxicating a certain creature with rice wine and trapping its eight heads in a series of gates. During his time in Izumo, this god retrieved the sword Kusanagi from the corpse of the aforementioned dragon Yamata no Orochi. He was banished from the heavens after throwing a flayed horse at his sister, who hid in a cave afterwards. For 10 points, name this Shinto god of storms, the son of Izanagi and brother of Amaterasu.

ANSWER: Susano'o [or Susanoo; or Susanowo; or Susanowa; or Takehaya Susanoo-no-Mikoto; or His Swift Impetuous Male Augustness]

Result: 563 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Schindler + Yale C + Minnesota B | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 38660

Question: This deity sought out Nemesis to arrange the rape of the goddess Aura. Daedalion's daughter Chione compared herself to this deity, prompting this deity to kill her. This goddess jumped in between the Aloadae, causing them to kill each other. She was worshipped by the cult of Orthia in Sparta and at Brauron in Athens, while another temple dedicated to her was sponsored by Croesus and burned down by Herostratus. Agamemnon was advised to sacrifice Iphigenia to appease this goddess, who was so offended by King Oeneus's failure to sacrifice to her that she sent the Calydonian Boar as retribution. The Ceryneian Hind was also sacred to this goddess, who used poisoned arrows to kill Niobe's daughters. Discovery of the floating island Delos allowed her mother Leto to give birth to her and her brother. For 10 points, name this sister of Apollo, the Greek goddess of the hunt.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 564 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: UVA A + OSU A | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 38675

Question: The beginning of Book II of the Metamorphoses describes one of these figures hugging whales. Poseidon gave his daughter Cymopolea in marriage to one of these figures. Pausanias relates a story in which one of them adjudicated a dispute between Poseidon and Helios over the Isthmus of Corinth. In Book I of the Iliad, Achilles reminds Thetis of how she summoned one of these figures, who squatted beside Zeus when Athena, Poseidon, and Hera attempted to chain him down. One of them was held to be the inventor of warships under his alternate name, Aegaeon. They threw many rocks at the Titans after Zeus freed them, along with their brothers the Cyclopes, from Tartarus002E For 10 points, Gyges, Cottus, and Briareus were the names of which three giants, known for their fifty heads and hundred hands?

ANSWER: Hecatonchires [or the Centimani; or the Hekatonkheires; accept the hundred-handed ones until it is read]

Result: 565 | ACF Regionals | 2013 | Round: Yale A + Minnesota A | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 38695

Question: One deity of this type held the harmless green zaltys snake sacred, carried a jug, and had her cheating husband punished by Perkunas. The jealous Baltic deity Saule served in this role, as did the Aztec god Tonatiuh, the ruler of the realm of Tollan. An Eastern deity of this kind had seven horses often shown as a single horse with seven heads, served as the chief of the Navagraha, and was the father of Yami and Yama. A Greek god of this domain seduced Clytie and Leucothoe, gave a Heracles-sized cup to Heracles, and welcomed the blinded Orion. At Ragnarok, the giant Norse wolf Skoll will eat this type of deity, other examples of which include the Hindu Surya and the son of Hyperion. Romans gave theirs the epithet "unconquered," or Invictus. For 10 points, name this mythological role given for a day to the total screwup Phaethon by his father Helios.

ANSWER: sun gods/goddesses [or solar deities; or drivers/owners of the solar chariot]

Result: 566 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 50642

Question: One corpse outside this place was covered by a black cloud as Sleep and Death carried it away. Snorri Sturluson argued that the Norse gods were just people from here. A king of this place, who tricked Heracles out of magic horses, was Laomedon. Podarces changed his name before becoming king of this city, which the Scamander River flowed around as Memnon and Sarpedon defended it. A nine-layer settlement at Hissarlik was identified as this home of Hecuba after Heinrich Schliemann excavated it. For 10 points, name this city in modern-day Turkey ruled by Priam, whose champion Hector defended it in a decade-long war shown in the Iliad.

ANSWER: Troy [or Ilium; or Ilion]

Result: 567 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 50834

Question: This deity sired one son with the giantess Jarnsaxa, and uses the help of the giantess Grid to defeat Geirrod. One of this god's animals is crippled when marrow from its thighbone is drunk by Roskva's brother; as punishment, this god forces Thialfi to become his servant. This owner of Toothgrinder and Toothgnasher, two chariot-pulling goats, is unable to lift a cat which is actually the Midgard Serpent. This god, the husband of the golden-haired Sif, once dressed up in a bridal gown as Freya to retrieve a stolen weapon which returns to him when thrown. For 10 points, name this giant-slayer and wielder of Mjolnir, the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [or Donar]

Result: 568 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 50851

Question: This deity turned a woman who claimed she could run as fast as him, Arge, into a doe, and did not return the love of the Oceanid Clytie. This god helped Heracles get to Erytheia by lending him a golden cup-boat, and he restored Orion's sight. On the isle of Thrinacia, this god's sacred herd of cattle was eaten by Odysseus's men, causing their destruction. This god dwelt in a golden palace in the eastern ocean, where he greeted his son Phaethon; he then let Phaethon accidentally set the earth ablaze with this god's chariot. For 10 points, name this god often conflated with Apollo, the Greek god of the sun.

ANSWER: Helios [or Helius]

Result: 569 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 51048

Question: This man used a spear to defeat a fire-breathing musician who appears yearly, named Aillen. A cycle of poems about this man are told by his son, who related this man's tales after staying in the land of the young for three hundred years. This man had a wife who was turned into a deer, and his band of warriors included the traitorous Goll mac Morna. This father of Ossian burned his thumb cooking the Salmon of Knowledge at the orders of his tutor Finegas. For 10 points, name this folk hero of the Fenian cycle, who sleeps in a cave beneath Ireland.

ANSWER: Finn MacCool [or Fionn mac Cumhaill; or Deimne; or Finn MacCooill]

Result: 570 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 13 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 51058

Question: Omens of this man's arrival include a swarm of bees clumping on a sacred laurel tree and his eventual wife's hair catching fire. In one battle, he kills Lausus, making the tyrant Mezentius weep; he later stabs his main foe upon seeing the dead soldier Pallas's belt. This son of Creusa once carried his crippled father on his back. This rival of Turnus heeded Mercury's appeals to duty and caused his lover's suicide by fleeing Carthage. This fighter in the Trojan War was advised to flee the burning city of Troy by his mother Venus. For 10 points, name this ancestor of the Romans and lover of Dido, the subject of a twelve-book epic by Vergil.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 571 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 14 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 51088

Question: This deity is revived with water of life by Asushunamir. In a prominent myth, this deity's visit to Irkalla's queen Ereshkigal is halted by gatekeepers who each require the removal of an article of clothing; that visit got this deity trapped in the underworld while trying to rescue Tammuz, her lover. This counterpart of the Semitic Astarte and the Sumerian Inanna sends Anu's Bull of Heaven after being rejected by Gilgamesh. For 10 points, name this Assyrio-Babylonian goddess of war and love.

ANSWER: Ishtar [accept Inanna until "Semitic" is read]

Result: 572 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 50667

Question: A Latin king who became one of this class of animals when Circe hit him with a golden twig was named Picus. A big one taught Zal to do a C-section to aid Rustam's birth in Persian myth. Simurgh was in this class of creatures, as was the Chinese fenghuang. * Two black animals in this class representing thought and memory, Hugin and Munin, report to Odin, and another black one was a non-Coyote trickster god of the Pacific Northwest. In Hindu myth, their king is Garuda, and women with these creatures' bodies who sing to sailors are called sirens. For 10 points, name this class of animals which makes up half of a harpy and includes the phoenix.

ANSWER: birds [or Aves; accept woodpeckers on the first clue; accpet crows or ravens or blackbirds after the asterisk; accept eagles during the Garuda clause]

Result: 573 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 50687

Question: In Chinese legend, one of these events is dealt with by Gun, Shun, and Yu the Great before Yu founds the Xia ("shYAH") dynasty. Themis gives a command to throw the "bones of one's mother" behind oneself after another one of them. During one of these events, Matsya, the first avatar of Vishnu, guided Vaivasvata Manu. The Sumerian Utnapishtim became immortal after one of these events, which spared Deucalion and Pyrrha in the Greek telling. A covenant preventing this from recurring was shown to the father of Japheth, Ham, and Shem using a rainbow. For 10 points, name this common fabled disaster, prior to which Noah built an ark.

ANSWER: floods [or Great Floods; or deluge; accept any answer indicating survival during any of the above; prompt "extinction of mankind"]

Result: 574 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 50716

Question: One member of this group had small crab claws for horns and was wed to another with small wings on her forehead; a third fought alongside his son Menoetius ("me-NEE-tee-us"). Their army suffered barrages of rocks thrown by three giants with a hundred hands each, according to Hesiod, who attributed a base on mount Othrys to them. The leader of this group used an unbreakable sickle on his father, and was tricked by his wife into swallowing a stone as his paranoia led him to eat his children. Oceanus, Tethys, and Prometheus are among, for 10 points, what old divinities led by Cronus, who were defeated and replaced by Zeus's Olympian gods?

ANSWER: the Titans [or Titanes]

Result: 575 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 50740

Question: This figure murdered Fimafeng in a dialogue-heavy text partly named for him. This being defeated the eagle-shaped Thiazi, and his son Vali was turned into a wolf who ate his other son Narfi. On one outing, he lost an eating contest to a similarly-named personification of fire. This being accused at least three gods of incest at a feast which he departed in the form of a salmon. He is currently tied beneath the earth under a venom-dripping serpent because he gave a blind archer mistletoe to arrange the death of Baldur. For 10 points, name this father of Hel and Fenrir who will fight the gods at Ragnarok, a mythical Norse trickster.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 576 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 50749

Question: The most prominent Minoan goddess held these creatures in both hands. Alongside a baby, seeing one of these creatures made Herse, Pandrosos, and Aglauros go mad after Athena gave Erichthonius to them in a basket. Before death, Cadmus becomes one of these creatures, and another killed of the newlywed Eurydice after she tripped. Athens's king Cecrops has the lower half of these creatures, and Tiresias switched genders upon hitting a pair of them. As an infant, Heracles strangles two with his baby hands, and two others surround the caduceus staff borne by Hermes. The Chimera's tail is one of, for 10 points, what creatures which make up the Gorgon Medusa's hair?

ANSWER: snakes [or serpents; do not accept "dragons" since these are all unambiguously common snakes]

Result: 577 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 50776

Question: These people believed in a realm separated from the east by two sycamore trees made of turquoise gemstone, and represented one aspect of the soul as a human-headed bird. This culture's afterlife included a Field of Reeds, and they used the Opening of the Mouth ceremony to prepare some men for death. A lion-bodied demon devours some of their dead after a task in which a truth goddess's feather is placed opposite a dead heart on a scale for weighing. For 10 points, name this civilization behind a non-Tibetan Book of the Dead, which believed in a next world ruled by Osiris and helped mummified pharaohs get there.

ANSWER: Ancient Egyptians [or Old Kingdom; or Middle Kingdom; or New Kingdom]

Result: 578 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 50799

Question: Lake Nemi is sacred to this deity, who saved Arethusa by turning Alpheus into a spring and ran between the Aloadae, Otus and Ephialtes, to make them hit each other and save Olympus. One follower of this deity bore Arcas. At Aulis, this deity whisked off Iphigenia instead of taking her as a sacrifice from Agamemnon. The Calydonian boar was sent by this goddess who killed the daughters of Niobe. Actaeon was turned into a stag and eaten by his dogs for stumbling on her bathing, and she turned her follower Callisto into a bear for failing to stay a virgin like herself. For 10 points, name this twin of Apollo, a huntress goddess identified with the moon.

ANSWER: Artemis [or Diana]

Result: 579 | BHSAT | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 50815

Question: The Chinese deity Erlang Shen used three of these objects on Sun Wukong while Sun Wukong was in the form of a temple. Ra owns one of them that can be personified into Wadjet. After fleeing from Izanami, the Shinto kami Izanagi washed Tsukuyomi and Amaterasu out of these objects. While trying to find Medusa, Perseus stole one of these body parts from the Graeae, who collectively own one tooth and one of these. A giant who fell asleep while listening to Hermes' lyre, Argus, had one hundred of these all over his body, allowing him to guard Io without interruption. For 10 points, identify this body part, only one of which is possessed by a Cyclops.

ANSWER: eyes [or eyeballs]

Result: 580 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 52518

Question: Odin used the eyes of one of these beings to create two new stars; that figure of this type transformed into an eagle to help steal the apples of youth, and is named Thiazi. Lif and Lifthrasir will avoid the onslaught of these beings by hiding in Hoddmimis holt. Another of these beings sustains itself on the milk of Audhumla. Thor is challenged to to an eating contest by one named Utgard-Loki. One named Surtr will lead his hordes onto the rainbow bridge, Bifrost, after being freed from Muspelheim. One of the first of these beings was Ymir. They are split into Fire and Frost variants. For 10 points, name these humanoids from Norse myth known as jotunn, who are enormous.

ANSWER: giants [accept frost giant or fire giant or rock giant; accept jotunn before mentioned]

Result: 581 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 52701

Question: Orpheus was killed by devotees of this figure. Perseus and the Argives defeated this deity and his followers after he stumbled into Mycenaea . This grandson of Cadmus and Harmonia rescued his mother from the Underworld and placed her among the stars before ascending to Mount Olympus. He became the immortal lover of Ariadne. This wielder of the thyrsus sought revenge on Lycurgus and Pentheus when he returned from India. The maenads were female followers of this god. His cult celebrated the Eleusinian Mysteries. Midas did a favor for Silenus, one of this god's devotees. For 10 points, name this leader of the satyrs, who presided over ecstasy and wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus

Result: 582 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 52707

Question: In Through a Glass Darkly, a crazed Karin tells her husband she saw God's face as one of these figures. One of them aided Muhammad in the Cave of Thawr during the Hijra. Some of these animals like Larinioides move by ballooning. Louis XI's nickname invoked one of these animals. One of them launches "filament, filament, filament, out of itself" in a Whitman poem titled for a "noiseless, patient" one. Another of these creatures learns all the world's stories in Ashanti myth. In another tale, an enraged Athena transforms a girl into one of these creatures after a weaving contest. For 10 points, name these animals associated with Anansi and Arachne.

ANSWER: spiders [or arachnids before the end]

Result: 583 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 52735

Question: General description acceptable. After the gods made fun of Athena's hideous face when she used one of these objects, she threw it away, and it was picked up by a satyr. Amphion used one of these objects in order to move stones to construct the walls of Thebes. One of these objects was used by Heracles to kill his teacher Linus. Marsyas was flayed alive after a contest involving these objects. One of these objects was fashioned from the remains of Syrinx after she was transformed by her sisters into some reeds. Apollo exchanged his cattle for one of these objects after Hermes fashioned it from cow gut and a tortoise shell. For 10 points, name these objects which included the aulos, the pan-pipes, and the lyre.

ANSWER: musical instruments [or same-knowledge equivalents that involve music in some way; however, at any point in this tossup, you can accept aulos, pan-pipes, or lyres]

Result: 584 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 52751

Question: This man's image is notably absent from a temple that Aeneas visits in Book VI of the Aeneid, because casting it in gold caused the sculptor so much grief. This man's mother was Naucrate, and his brother Iapyx was Aeneas' personal healer during the Trojan War. Heracles renamed the island of Doliche for this man and buried his body. This man's father was recognized at Cocalus' court because he threaded a shell by tying the thread to an ant's leg. This man's death came after his father gave Ariadne a spool of thread. He drowned in the sea now bearing his name after his feathers began to melt. For 10 points, name this son of Daedalus who flew too close to the Sun.

ANSWER: Icarus

Result: 585 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 13 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 52763

Question: A character of this type rips off his wife's nose after she has a knight steal his clothing in Marie de France's lay "Bisclavret." Sigmund and his son Sinfjotli are cursed with this punishment after trying on some magical skins in the Volsung Saga. Navajo "skin-walkers" are analogues to these creatures. After he served human meat to Zeus, a Greek man not named Tantalus was cursed with this punishment. Though not witches, these creatures were "tried" in Europe in the 1600s, after many people probably suffered porphyria. Their name derives from Lycaon in Greek myth. For 10 points, a silver bullet is the way to kill what people cursed to shapeshift during a full moon?

ANSWER: werewolves [or lycanthropes; or people who turn into wolves; or "the thing that Remus Lupin turns into"; prompt on "shapeshifters" or similar answers; do not accept "wolves"]

Result: 586 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 14 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 52798

Question: Either Greek or Roman name acceptable. This god is the father of Voluptas. In an ancient fable, this god complains about being stung by bees after trying to steal their honey. Ovid's first book of poetry begins by "surrendering" to this god. He disguises himself in the Aeneid as Iulus, Aeneas' son, which is ironic, since he and Aeneas have the same mother. After being convinced that this god is a giant snake, his lover spills hot oil on him and flees. This god is often depicted riding a dolphin. In a story from The Golden Ass, this god falls in love with Psyche. He accidentally hits Daphne with a lead arrow, causing her to flee from Apollo. For 10 points, name this son of Aphrodite, a love god.

ANSWER: Eros [or Cupid]

Result: 587 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 52531

Question: This man used three wishes granted to him by Poseidon to kill his son by having the son dragged under a horse. Medea nearly poisoned this hero after marrying his father. According to one myth, this man's descendants had lean thighs because this man's buttocks remained stuck to the chair in the Underworld. When this father of Hippolytus lifted a giant boulder, he found sandals and a sword left to him by his father Aegeus. He confronted the bandits Sciron and Procrustes on his way to Athens, a city he would later rule, and offered himself up for sacrifice on a journey to Crete. For 10 points, name this lover of Ariadne who slew the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 588 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 52565

Question: In order to do this action, one mythical figure tied a black ram to a ewe, then poured milk and honey, followed by wine and water, into a pit. That person spoke to Elpenor and Anticlea while doing this. A different hero was required to talk to the Cumaean Sibyl and deliver the Golden Bough to her in order to do this action, in order to talk to his father Anchises. This action, performed by Odysseus and Aeneas, was also performed by Heracles as part of his Twelfth Labor. One person who did this looked back at his wife Eurydice, causing him to lose her forever. For 10 points, name this action which Orpheus took to try and bring back his wife to the living.

ANSWER: going into the Underworld [or going into Hades; accept same-knowledge equivalents such as "leaving the Underworld" or "entering the Underworld"]

Result: 589 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 52575

Question: The Book of the Heavenly Cow discusses a rebellion against this god. This god's daughter stripped naked to cheer him up; he fed that daughter red beer, rather than blood, after changing his mind about destroying humanity. This god's cult was centered at Heliopolis. He was poisoned by a snake to make him divulge his secret name. Khnum [CUH-NOOM] and Khepri were aspects of this god. This father of Bastet and Hathor was thought to be merely a creation of Ptah by Memphis; by that time, he had been syncretized with Atum. Apep attacked this god's chariot every night. For 10 points, name this Egyptian sun god.

ANSWER: Ra [or Re; or Atum-Ra; or Amun-Ra]

Result: 590 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 52613

Question: In the Mabinogion, Bran the Blessed asks to be killed in this way. At Bricriu's [pr. BRICK-RE-OOS] feast, the "champion's portion" is given to Cu Chulainn (pr. COO COO-LAIN) after he is dared to kill Cu Roi in this manner. A "magic girdle" "saves" a man from being killed in this way in a work by the Pearl Poet. Odin gains the knowledge of the word after the Vanir kill Mimir in this way. This manner of death befell the mortal sibling of Stheno (pr. STENO) and Euryale after she was punished for sleeping with Poseidon in Athena's shrine. The Green Knight nearly killed Gawain in this way. Using a helmet of invisibility and a reflective shield, Perseus was able to kill Medusa, for 10 points, in what manner?

ANSWER: decapitation [or beheading or similar answers]

Result: 591 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 52630

Question: A hrimthurs [HER-IM-THURS] and one of these creatures built the walls of Asgard. In Norse myth, Arvakr and Alsvidr were these creatures. Odin stakes his head on a competition with Hrungnir involving these creatures, and Thor gives one named Gullfaxi to Magni. One of these named Grani appeared from a river in front of Sigurd. One of these animals has runes carved onto his teeth and transports Hermodr to Hel after the death of Baldr. That son of Svadilfari [SVOD-ILL-FAR-EE] and Loki has eight legs and belongs to Odin. For 10 points, Sleipnir is a type of what animal, exemplified by the winged Pegasus in Greek myth?

ANSWER: horses

Result: 592 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 52646

Question: In a work by Chretien de Troyes, this man fights with Melegeant and ends up entering a "cart," destroying his dignity. This man dies while acting as a priest in a convent, prompting his friends to go fight in the Crusades. This brother of Ector de Maris is seduced by the Fair Maid of Astolat and renames his castle "the Dolorous Gard". This man kills Gareth and Gaheris, then has an epic battle with their brother Gawain, at the end of Le Morte d'Arthur. This knight is unable to achieve the Holy Grail, but his son with Elaine, Galahad, is. For 10 points, name this man who carries on an affair with Guinevere but is nevertheless considered Arthur's greatest knight.

ANSWER: Sir Lancelot [or Sir Launcelot]

Result: 593 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 52673

Question: In order to do this, Incans tied black dogs up outside and starved them. In a Mayan tradition to do this, children lined up at the points of a compass and pretended to be frogs to appease Chaac. In Native American myth, an animal that did this battled with a whale and lived atop a mountain. Native Americans drove sticks into turtles' shells in order to do this. This was the most important function of a multi-colored serpent central to Australian aboriginal mythology. Aztecs prayed to Tlaloc in order for this to happen, and invented a stick filled with pebbles to promote it. For 10 points, name this object of "dances" by Southwestern Native Americans, in order to end droughts.

ANSWER: bringing rain [or bringing storms; or bringing lightning or thunder; or bringing a flood; or ending a drought before mention; or rain dancing; or same-knowledge equivalents]

Result: 594 | BISB | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 52690

Question: One of these animals lives along with Tigris in the Dvei Ilai, and is known as Keresh. One type of this animal is actually Maricha in disguise. Hrothgar's Hall of Heorot literally translates as a place for these animals. Ravana is able to capture Sita because Lakshmana and Rama are chasing one of these animals covered in gold. One of these from Keryneia was captured by Heracles during his Third Labor. In punishment for seeing a goddess bathing, Actaeon was transformed into one of these animals. For 10 points, name these animals which were considered sacred to Artemis.

ANSWER: deer [or stags; or does; or any other equivalents]

Result: 595 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 33632

Question: One of these figures named Tugarin flew on paper wings, which his enemy destroyed by praying for rain. Apollonius of Rhodes writes of a race of these figures whom Jason meets on the same island as the Doliones. Another of these figures, the oldest of the bogatyrs and a native of the Holy Mountains, blows his strength into Ilya Muromets as he dies; that one is named Svyatogor. Hecate used a sword, lance, and torch to kill one of these figures named Klytios in a scene depicted on the (*) Pergamon Altar. One of these figures had to be dragged out of Pallene in order to be killed and was named Alcyoneus, while one named Porphyrion was killed by a thunderbolt while trying to rape Hera. Those deaths occurred during a war between these figures and the gods, who required the aid of Heracles. For 10 points, name these enormous humanoid creatures.

ANSWER: giants [or Gigantes]

Result: 596 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 34033

Question: In one text, a set of these things is first mentioned after a shiny bow called Bowstar is lifted and kissed. In the unembellished fragments catalogued by scholar William Leonard King, they include Asari, the "bestower of planting." One of these with five sets of attributes of its own, such as "Life of the host of the gods," is Tutu, and another with a directorial role is Nari-lugal-dimmer-ankia. The Three Hundred (*) Igigi create these things for the founder of the Esharra house while sitting in assembly, beginning with Asarluhi. Their possessor, who was worshipped at Etemenanki, earns them after he forms the earth and sky by splitting the body of a saltwater dragon, as told in the last two tablets of the Enuma Elish. For 10 points, identify this set of words which includes "Bel," meaning "Lord", fifty different ways to address the slayer of Tiamat and chief god of Babylon.

ANSWER: the fifty names of Marduk [or aspects of the god Marduk]

Result: 597 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 34009

Question: This husband of Urmila made an important crossing on the back of Angada. This hero prevented an opponent from summoning an unstoppable tiger-born chariot by destroying a ladle used to offer butter to Agni. To save a woman from being eaten, this man cut off the demoness Surpanakha's nose, inadvertently starting a war. A god saves this avatar of Sesha from death by lifting an entire (*) mountain upon which a magic herb grows. This slayer of Indrajit and third son of Dasaratha left a woman behind after hearing the dying Maricha take on his brother's voice, leading to the abduction of Sita. For 10 points, name this friend and brother of Rama in the Ramayana.

ANSWER: Lakshmana

Result: 598 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 34172

Question: This man's sister Physadeia was once taken hostage by Castor and Pollux; she later became a handmaiden of Helen of Troy. An alternate myth holds that this man was killed by a big dog after trying to abduct the daughter of the Molossian king Aedoneus. In the Metamorphoses, this man claims that the gods do not actually have the power to change their shape, prompting Achelous to tell the story of Philemon and Baucis. This man tested a hero's bravery by driving that man's cattle from (*) Marathon and subsequently befriended that hero. A sudden earthquake convinced Heracles not to rescue this man; thus, he is still bound to the Chair of Forgetfulness for trying to abduct Persephone. That occurred after the death of this man's wife Hippodamia, whose marriage to this man provoked the Centauromachy. For 10 points, name this bosom companion of Theseus, the mythological king of the Lapiths.

ANSWER: Pirithous [or Peirithoos]

Result: 599 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 13 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 34957

Question: At one point, this figure encountered two brothers with the same name, and the older one attempts to lure him into a special hall to chop his head off with an intricate machine, but the plan backfires. Earlier, this figure encounters a god in the shape of a bear, who casts a spell that makes him and his followers fall asleep - as a result, the thunder god sends him a magical sword in his sleep. This figure was aided by a red crow with (*) three legs, sometimes called the "sun crow" or the "eight-span crow." Early in life, his brother Itsuse was killed during the battle at Kusaka hill, and buried at Mount Kama. His name means "divine warrior" and he was sent on a quest to find new land - at last, he discovers Yamato, where he builds a palace and marries a princess. FTP, name this direct descendant of Amaterasu who, according to the Kojiki, was the legendary first emperor of Japan.

ANSWER: Emperor Jimmu Tenno

Result: 600 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 14 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 34968

Question: On Ceos, this man put the murderers of Icarius to death and offered sacrifices to Zeus, thereby convincing Zeus to send the Etesian Winds to cool the heat of the Dog Star. Though he is not Menelaus, this man was instructed to sacrifice four cows and four bulls, then bring a black ewe and poppies to their corpses nine days later, after he successfully captured the shape-shifting Proteus. This man was born in Libya to a nymph who had been carried off while wrestling a lion on Mount Pelion. Father to the ill-fated hunter Actaeon, this man is the subject of an epyllion in the fourth book of (*) Vergil's Georgics. This son of Cyrene brought a bunch of bees out of a rotting corpse to end a curse placed on him after a woman was bitten by a snake on the banks of Tempe. For 10 points, name this honey-loving son of Apollo whose pursuit of Eurydice resulted in her death.

ANSWER: Aristaeus

Result: 601 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 16 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 35019

Question: In one myth, this god transformed a bunch of stones into an army to help his son defeat the army of Uscovilca; another son saw this god with a lion between his legs and snakes around his arms in a reflective crystal that fell into a pool. Chastity-bound women dedicated to this deity were called the acclas. An image of this deity was the centerpiece of the "Golden Enclosure." This god sent the four Ayars down to earth, instructing one of them to found a city wherever his (*) gold staff sank into the ground. A huge festival honored this god with burnt pack animals on the winter solstice and was called his "Raymi." Also called Apu-Punchau, this god was married to the moon goddess Mama Quilla and was considered the father of the emperor Manco Capac. For 10 points, name this son of Viracocha often depicted as a disk from which fiery rays extend, since he was the Incan sun god.

ANSWER: Inti [or Apu-punchau before mention]

Result: 602 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 17 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 35032

Question: One of these animals turned himself into a piece of dirt to impregnate a young girl, whose child then broke open bundles to free the world's stars, moon, and daylight. In Roman legend, Marcus Valerius gained his agnomen after another of these animals helped him defeat a giant Gaul in single combat. In the Dream of Rhonabwy, these animals are killed by King Arthur's squires, then come back to life and kill those squires, while Owein and Arthur play chess. Another of these animals took a loaf of bread poisoned by some dissatisfied (*) monks out of the grasp of Saint Benedict, which is why this animal is an aspect of Saint Benedict. Six or seven of these animals in the Tower of London are necessary for the protection of England. In Celtic myth, the appearance of one of these animals signals Cuchulain's death, and in Welsh myth, Bran the Blessed takes his name from this animal. For 10 points, name this kind of bird exemplified by Odin's companions Hugin and Munin.

ANSWER: ravens

Result: 603 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 33667

Question: Two characters born here were rulers of the Tyrsenoi named Ardeas and Latinus. A character who died in this location asks to be burned in his armor and buried by the sea, with only an oar to mark his gravestone; that character broke his neck after slipping off a ladder in this location. One inhabitant of this place absolved the Argonauts for the death of Absyrtus and turned Picus into a woodpecker. This site of the death of (*) Elpenor was the birthplace of the father of Italus, who sacked an island that he thought was Corcyra and in the process killed his father with the spine of a stingray. In its most famous appearance, this island was visited shortly after Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians, and was the place where Hermes gave the herb moly to a certain hero. Eurylochus avoided its most famous inhabitant's use drugged wine to turn some sailors into swine. For 10 points, Odysseus and his remaining crew spent a year on which island, the home of the sorceress Circe?

ANSWER: Aeaea [or Eëa; or Aiaia; anti-prompt on "Circe's house" or equivalents]

Result: 604 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 33684

Question: A Hindu god of this element ruined the backs of the hundred daughters of Kushanabha after they refused to have sex with him. In The Lay of Igor's Campaign, the grandsons of the Slavic god Stribog have power over this element, which is also the domain of the Assyrian demon king Pazuzu. In Babylonian myth, Adapa was called before Anu for injuring a god of this element. In Hindu mythology, a set of gods of this classical element was born after Diti's super-powerful baby was cut into (*) forty-nine pieces. Controlled by the Maruts and Quetzalcoatl's form of Ehecatl, this element is the domain of Hanuman's father Vayu and the Sumerian god Enlil. For 10 points, name this type of god exemplified in Japanese myth by Fujin and in Greek myth by Zephyr.

ANSWER: wind gods [or gods of the air; prompt on storms or lightning until "classical element" is read; do not accept or prompt on "sky gods"]

Result: 605 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 33695

Question: In one story, this god discovers that his three sisters have been transformed into monsters after being stolen three hundred years ago by one of his arch-enemies. In that battle, this deity kills the fiendish Skiper Serpent, who is swallowed up by the Earth in order to produce a mountain range. He proclaimed "There is your place, remain there" from the top of a tree to an enemy who returns every year after shedding his skin. Some of this god's oddest weapons include (*) golden apples, which he throws in the air like explosives. He is symbolized by an eagle sitting on the top of the tallest branch of a sacred tree, while his arch enemy is the serpent-like god of the underworld, Veles. This deity rides in a chariot pulled by a goat buck and carries an axe that always returns to his hand. For 10 points, name this Slavic god of thunder and lightning.

ANSWER: Perun

Result: 606 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 33761

Question: Several of these things are described by the bird-monster Nemglan, including one regarding the direction of travel around Brega and another about sleeping in a house that has fire visible from the outside. One of these things regarding invitations to feasts led to the sons of Usna losing their protector. Nine of these are given to Conaire Mor in The Destruction of Da Derga's Hostel. (*) Connla was given one of these things involving telling any men his name, and a prominent one is broken when a crone offers a meal to a traveler, causing Cu Culain to eat dog meat. For 10 points, identify these burdensome taboos which are placed on heroes in Irish mythology.

ANSWER: geis [or geas or gessi or geasa]

Result: 607 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 33914

Question: In one story, this figure instructs Ila Devi on how to behave with her husband on her wedding night, then is consumed by yearning. Married to Ayana, this character plays a central role in the ras lila. This focus of Jayadeva's Gita Govinda is the daughter of Vrishbhanu and is accompanied by eight sakhis, including Visakha and Lalita, who stand in opposition to a similar group led by Candravali. She is worshipped in (*) Vrindavan, and represents the soul's yearning for union with her consort, according to the bhakti cult. Sometimes considered an avatar of Lakshmi, she waits for her consort even though he has married the Ashta-bharyas, including Rukhmini. For 10 points, name this foremost gopi, who is loved by Krishna.

ANSWER: Radharani [or Radhikarani; prompt on Lakshmi]

Result: 608 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 33937

Question: In a folktale collected in the Decameron, Friar Cipolla tries to scam a crowd by passing one of these objects off as a relic, but finds it has been replaced in its box by some charcoal. In Algonquin myth, Glooskap lies that one of these objects it the only thing that can harm him in a bid to defeat his brother Malsun. In the Popol Vuh, the Hero Twins survive the Dark House by using these things to imitate the flame of a torch. Prince (*) Ivan brought one of these things to his father after failing to catch the figure stealing his golden apples. An apocryphal story about Diogenes arose after Plato defined man as a biped that lacked these things. In Norse myth, Freya's cloak is made of these objects, a ball of which impregnates Coatlicue with Huitzilopochtli. For 10 points, name the kind of object that represents the goddess Ma'at and is weighed against a human soul in Egyptian mythology.

ANSWER: a feather [or a bit of charcoal until it is read; or an angel's feather; or an owl's feather; or a falcon's feather; or a Firebird feather]

Result: 609 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 33945

Question: In one story, this man meets Zangara, who, in the form of a bull, tells him to sacrifice a bull and two goats. That incident occurs after this man falls ill and placed in a location with food that can serve as either provisions or grave goods. In a sequel to that story, he gains super speed after feeding a lion-headed eagle, which allows him to serve as a messenger for Inanna. Those stories which see this hero serve as a soldier in his predecessor's war against the ruler of Aratta are those of this man "in the Mountain Cave" and this man "and the Anzu Bird." The oil filled horns of the Bull of Heaven were presented as an offering to this successor to Enmerkar, who, though not Marduk, is sometimes said to have killed (*) Zu to gain the Tablets of Destiny. This husband of Ninsun provided the mortal third to a man who was two-thirds divine through his father Shamash. For 10 points, name this second and longest reigning ruler of Uruk, the father of Gilgamesh.

ANSWER: Lugalbanda

Result: 610 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 33969

Question: In Frithiof's Saga, Helge puts an arm-ring from Volund's tomb on a statue of this god; Frithiof himself gets exiled after trying to remove the ring and burning down one of this god's temples. This god was the only member of the Aesir who did not attend Aegir's banquet. In a myth recorded by Saxo Grammaticus, this god is defeated after Miming the satyr gives his enemy a magical sword. This god partly titles an Eddic poem in which Odin, in disguise as Vegtam, awakens and questions a dead volva; that poem is set after he has mysterious bad (*) dreams. Vafthrudnir was unable to identify what Odin whispered to this god as he was carried to his gigantic ship, Hringhorni. This god gave the ring Draupnir to Hermod, who rode to Hel on his behalf, but was unable to obtain a reprieve for him because Thokk refused to mourn. For 10 points, name this Norse god of light who was slain with a piece of mistletoe.

ANSWER: Baldr

Result: 611 | Chicago Open | 2013 | Round: finals 1 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 35050

Question: In one story, this man fought his enemy to a draw nine times, then went to a mountain for three days to learn the art of war from the bird-bodied Dark Lady. One of his enemies was a bull-shaped monster with a bronze head and iron eyebrows who was the first to create metal weapons. This man made a drum from the skin of a one-legged lightning monster called Kui, and he used his companions Responding Dragon and Drought Fury to defeat the war god (*) Chiyou. When Nuwa isn't counted, he's generally the last of the Three Sovereigns after Fuxi and Shen Nong. this man invented writing and the pottery wheel, and was married to Leizu, who discovered the way to breed silkworms. For 10 points, name this culture hero considered the founder of Chinese civilization, a ruler of China named for a certain color.

ANSWER: the Yellow Emperor [or Huangdi]

Result: 612 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 33497

Question: Ajax the Greater went mad after this man received the armor of Achilles. Hermes gave this man the herb moly to protect him from the magic of the witch Circe, who then told him about the dangers of (*) Scylla and Charybdis. He was trapped by the nymph Calypso for seven years, during which his son Telemachus searched for him. For 10 points, name this Greek figure who spent ten years at sea trying to return to his wife Penelope.

ANSWER: Odysseus

Result: 613 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 33500

Question: One of these creatures named Ladon guarded the golden apples of the Hesperides [hes-PEER-uh-dees]. A Babylonian one of these creatures known as Tiamat was slain by Marduk [MAHR-dook]. One in Norse mythology was named Fafnir and was slain for his gold. (*) Puff is a "magic" example of, for 10 points, what kind of legendeary reptile that breathed fire and was allegedly slain by Saint George?

ANSWER: Dragons

Result: 614 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 34483

Question: Neoptolemus killed King Priam in the final stages of this event, after which Aeneas fled with his son. This event began after the Judgement of Paris and (*) Helen's abduction from King Menelaus of Sparta. After nine years, it finally ended after Greek soldiers got past enemy gates while hiding in a giant wooden horse. For 10 points, name this conflict in Greek mythology that featured warriors like Hector and Achilles.

ANSWER: Trojan War

Result: 615 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 33503

Question: These figures sent the dragon Campe to guard their more monstrous brothers in Tartarus. After losing a war in which he led these gods, Atlas was forced to lift the sky on his shoulders. Though he was one of them, (*) Prometheus left their side and joined with Zeus, who was the son of two of these gods named Rhea and Cronus. For 10 points, name these gods who preceded and fought a war with the Olympians.

ANSWER: Titans

Result: 616 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 33515

Question: Temples dedicated to this god include the Trimbakeshwar and Ramanaswathamy. Five is a sacred number to this god, which is reflected in his namesake "Five Mantras". His sons are Kartikeya and Ganesha. Although he's not Vishnu, this god has a number of avatars, and his wife is (*) Parvati. For 10 points, name this Hindu god which, along with Brahma and Vishnu, makes up the Hindu trimurti, a "destroyer" god.

ANSWER: Shiva [accept Shiva the Destroyer, Shiva the Transformer]

Result: 617 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 33529

Question: In Jainism, this object's central point is Mount Meru. In Chinese mythology, this object is the lower half of a cosmic egg split by Pangu, while in ancient Egypt the original form of this object was the primordial (*) mound. This region will be reborn from a massive flood after Rangarok. For 10 points, name this planet subjected to a massive flood that Noah escaped.

ANSWER: Earth [accept equivalents like world or land before "planet" is mentioned]

Result: 618 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 33541

Question: The sun deity of this myth system hid in a cave after her brother threw a flayed horse at her, but she was lured out with a dance and a mirror. After visiting the underworld, one of this myth system's gods washed his face, giving birth to the storm god Susano'o, the moon god (*) Tsukuyomi, and the sun goddess Amaterasu. Kami are the spiritual essences of, for 10 points, what mythological system practiced in Japan?

ANSWER: Shintoism

Result: 619 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 34292

Question: Isis once forced this god to reveal his name in return for healing a snakebite. This god was the ancestor of all members of the Ennead, which included his children Shu and Tefnut and his grandchildren Geb and Nut. This god's base of worship was (*) Heliopolis, and with the help of Set, this god fends off the attack of the snake Apep as he travels across the sky in his solar barge. For 10 points, name this Egyptian sun god.

ANSWER: Ra [accept Re or Amun-Ra or Atum-Ra]

Result: 620 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 34325

Question: After this god's son brought Hippolytus back to life, Asclepius was killed by Zeus. Along with his sister, he killed Niobe's seven sons. He slew the dragon Python and established the Oracle of Delphi at the place where it died. This son of Leto pursued the nymph (*) Daphne, only for her to turn into a laurel tree. For 10 points, name this Greek god of archery, music, and light whose twin sister was Artemis.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 621 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 34335

Question: This god hung himself from Yggdrasil for nine days and nights in order to obtain the knowledge of runes. This owner of the spear Gungnir gives all his food to his wolves Geri and Freki and receives information about the world through his ravens Hugin and Munin. This husband of Frigg was known as the "Allfather" and will be killed at (*) Ragnarok by the wolf Fenrir. For 10 points, name this chief god of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Odin [accept Wodan, Wotan, or Wodinaz]

Result: 622 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 34434

Question: For boasting of an affair with this goddess, Anchises was struck lame by Zeus. She and Persephone were forced to each spend a third of the year with Adonis. This goddess arrived on the island of Cythera after being born from (*) sea foam, and she was trapped under a golden net with her lover Ares while she was married to Hephaestus. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of love and beauty.

ANSWER: Aphrodite [accept Venus until "Hephaestus" is mentioned]

Result: 623 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 34437

Question: This man's ship was saved from destruction after Orpheus used his lyre to drown out the Sirens' singing. This man plowed a field with bronze, fire-breathing bulls and then sowed the teeth of a dragon into that field in order to retrieve an item that was made from the (*) ram that saved Phrixus and Helle. For 10 points, name this lover of Medea who led the Argonauts in the quest for the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Jason [or Iason]

Result: 624 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 34460

Question: This person from Gath defied the armies of Israel, demanding a fight to the death with one person under the condition that the winner's side would enslave the loser's side. He is finally challenged in the book of First Samuel Chapter 17 by the son of (*) Jesse, who was then a servant to Saul. For 10 points, name this large Philistine who is beheaded after being hit in the forehead by a stone from David's slingshot.

ANSWER: Goliath

Result: 625 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 34477

Question: In Norse mythology, the wolf Hati will devour this object at Ragnarok while Skoll will eat its sister. One goddess of this object put the shepherd Endymion in an eternal sleep and was the sister of Eos and Helios. Thoth's ibis bill represents the (*) crescent shape of this object. The Greek goddess Selene and the Roman goddess Luna were goddesses of, for 10 points, what nighttime celestial object?

ANSWER: moon

Result: 626 | Collegiate Novice | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 32908

Question: In one story, this figure's death came about due to his infatuation with the princess Polyxena. This figure, who used his spear to heal Telephus, the King of Mysia, owned the horses Balius and Xanthus. He killed the Amazonian warrior Penthesilea and fathered his son Neoptolemus while living in the court of Lycomedes. He fought and killed the warrior who slayed this man's friend Patroclus, who was wearing this man's armor. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who killed Hector and died when an arrow pierced his vulnerable heel.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 627 | Collegiate Novice | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 33389

Question: This deity got his epithet "Bhasma Anga Raaga" from his penchant for smearing ashes on himself. His namesake sect arose from the worship of the Vedic god Rudra. This deity wields the trishula trident, which some myths say is the instrument with which he chopped off Ganesha's original head when Ganesha got too close to this god's wife, Parvati. This deity, who is typically worshipped in the phallic form of the Lingam, is also depicted as Nataraja, the Cosmic Dancer. For 10 points, name this Hindu destroyer god who forms the Trimurti with Vishnu and Brahma.

ANSWER: Shiva [or Mahadeva; or Mahesh; or Bholenath]

Result: 628 | Collegiate Novice | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 32939

Question: This man's son bribed the charioteer Myrtilus into helping him court King Oenomaus's daughter Hippodamia. Pandareus stole a golden dog created by Hephaestus and gave it to this man, who later claimed to have never seen it when Pandereus asked him to return it. This patriarch of the House of Atreus invited the gods to a feast where he cooked and served his son as the main course. For 10 points, name this father of Pelops, a mythological man who spends eternity with food and water just beyond his grasp.

ANSWER: Tantalus

Result: 629 | Collegiate Novice | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 32976

Question: This god, who was depicted on coins called asses, raped the nymph Carna and commemorated the event by giving her a white hawthorn branch and the ability to control hinges. This god's wife Juturna and his son Fontus are both associated with wells and springs. Temples dedicated to this god kept their doors always closed during peacetime and always open during wartime. For 10 points, name the Roman god of choices and beginnings who has two faces and is the namesake of the first month of the calendar.

ANSWER: Janus [or Ianus]

Result: 630 | Collegiate Novice | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 33010

Question: This deity's quest to obtain a possession is chronicled in the Sorla pattr, which details how she slept with four dwarves. When this deity was promised with the sun and the moon for the building of a wall, another deity turned himself into a female horse to prevent the wall's completion. This deity receives half of slain warriors in her realm Fólkvangr. Thor once disguised himself as this deity, who has a chariot drawn by cats and owns the necklace Brísingamen. For 10 points, name this Vanir goddess, the sister of Frey and Norse god of love.

ANSWER: Freya [or Freyja]

Result: 631 | Collegiate Novice | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 33170

Question: One god from this myth system transformed his wife into a comb before extracting a sword from the tail of a dragon. Another deity in this system, born in Yomi like the other thunder gods, eats the navels of children. Adherents of this belief system worship at a shrine that is rebuilt every 20 years and dedicated to a goddess who retreated into a cave after her brother threw a flayed horse at her loom. For 10 points, name this myth system that reveres kami like the storm god Susano'o and the sun goddess Amaterasu, the traditional religion of Japan.

ANSWER: Shinto myth system [or Shintoism; prompt on Japanese myth system]

Result: 632 | Collegiate Novice | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 33194

Question: This god, disguised as Bolverk, worked a summer for Baugi and seduced Gunnlod in order to steal the Mead of Poetry from Suttung. In his quest for wisdom, this god hung from Yggdrasil for nine days and traded one of his eyes for a drink from the Well of Mimir. This god owns the ravens Hugin and Munin and his spear Gungnir never misses its target. At Ragnarok, the wolf Fenrir will kill this leader of the Aesir. For 10 points, name this husband of Frigga, the chief god of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Odin

Result: 633 | Collegiate Novice | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 33231

Question: According to Ovid, this figure's blood was said to have caused the formation of corals in the Red Sea. Unlike her siblings Stheno and Euryale, this daughter of Keto and Phorcys was mortal. In one story, this figure was cursed after she was caught making love with Poseidon in Athena's temple. This figure's children included Chrysaor and Pegasus, who were born after she was beheaded by Perseus. For 10 points, name this Gorgon with snake-like hair whose gaze could turn people to stone.

ANSWER: Medusa

Result: 634 | Collegiate Novice | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 33343

Question: One god of this entity was often depicted as a scarab beetle and was named Khepri. One god of this entity was worshipped through the Mnevis Bull and through his conflation with Khnum was represented with a ram's head. Isis once poisoned that god of this entity and only gave him the antidote when he revealed to her his true name. A god of this entity, who owns the boats Mandjet and Masektet that Set defends from attacks by Apep, was often combined with Amun. For 10 points, name this celestial body associated with Ra.

ANSWER: sun [accept equivalents]

Result: 635 | Collegiate Novice | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 33357

Question: While traveling along the Road of the Sun, this figure was questioned by two scorpion-men. This figure, who dreamed about being attracted to a meteorite, retrieved a plant from the bottom of the ocean after asking Utnapishtim about the secret of immortality. This figure defeated Humbaba, the guardian of the Cedar Forest, with help from his companion who was tamed after sleeping with the temple prostitute Shamhat. For 10 points, name this friend of the wild man Enkidu, the protagonist of a namesake Mesopotamian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh [accept Epic of Gilgamesh]

Result: 636 | Delta Burke | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 60708

Question: An ancient epithet for this deity is "Foremost of the Westerners," referencing his traditional realm. Certain cults worshiped this deity's soul, Banebdjedet, as a separate entity. Passion plays were re-enacted to remind his cult of his transformation during the flooding of the Nile in spring. The eldest son of Geb and Nut, his sister posthumously bore him a son, who offered his father his own eye to restore him. An oxyrhynchus fish ate the phallus of, FTP, what Egyptian deity, brother and husband of Isis?

ANSWER: Osiris

Result: 637 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 35095

Question: In order to obtain charms to make a boat, this character pries open the mouth of a giant and descends into its belly, where he begins smithing and refuses to leave until he gets the charms. After his axe slips and injures him, he bleeds profusely until he finds an expert blood stauncher. This character recommends that the child of the virgin (*) Marjatta be put to death, for which the child chastises him. Later, he sails away forever on a copper boat and leave his harp behind as a source of joy. This character uses an oar to fight the shapeshifting Louhi to protect a magic mill called the Sampo. Earlier, he had convinced Ilmarinen to forge the Sampo so that he could marry the maid of North Farm. For 10 points, name this Finnish hero, the protagonist of the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Väinämöinen

Result: 638 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 35304

Question: According to the Argonautica, one of these entities begins nearby a cave which blasts ice on all things nearby it, only for the sun to melt it. Because the rocks surrounding another of these features are incredibly dangerous, an eagle assists Psyche in collecting material from one. The goddess Nike was a child of Pallas and a personification of one of these - that one of them was the first to side with Zeus in the titanomachy. Lesser known examples of these include (*) Cocytus and the fiery Phlegethon, and Themis visited one to make her son immortal. One that exemplifies pain is Acheron, and one that induces forgetfulness is Lethe. For 10 points, name these geographical features, the most notable of which is Styx.

ANSWER: rivers of the Underworld [In place of Underworld, take Hades, Tartarus, or Dis. Prompt on "rivers"]

Result: 639 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 35329

Question: One account states that this entity was merely a mountain that hovered over the seas, which caused many people to fantasize about what it might do to them. According to the text Il Milione, this entity was spotted accurately by some inhabitants of Madagascar, and it is capable of tossing elephants into the air. One dude who encounters one of these creatures steps onto a huge pile of meat (*) and is transported by one out of a valley where diamonds line its base like a carpet does. This animal is often conflated with the simurgh and the Indian Garuda. Sinbad the Sailor encounters the eggs of these creatures, who naturally eat snakes. For 10 points, name this huge-ass Persian bird.

ANSWER: Roc or Rukh

Result: 640 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 35363

Question: At this locale's capital are four fountains that spray milk, wine, fragrant oil and water mixed with flowers. For this kingdom, Hephaestus created a pair of fire-breathing bulls made out of gold. Its queen is Eidyia, who mothered its loyal princess Chalciope. On the way to this kingdom, a hero defeats King (*) Amycus of the Bebryces. A visitor to this kingdom sows the teeth of dragons and escapes its navy when its princess cuts up Absyrtus into pieces. For 10 points, name this kingdom whose royalty includes Medea, and to which Jason travelled to get the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Colchis

Result: 641 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 13 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 35366

Question: In The Book of Dede Korkut, this trait is possessed by the ogre Tepegoz. Herodotus records that a race with this characteristic constantly warred with the gryphons and own the largest source of gold on earth. This trait, which is possessed by the Arimaspians, is also possessed by the husband of Cethlenn who imprisoned his daughter Ethlinn in a crystal tower before he uses it for his own evil purposes at (*) Magh Tuired. Odin voluntarily gave himself this deformity in order to get a drink from Mimir's well. A son of Thoosa with this trait murdered Acis and ate some of Odysseus's men. For 10 points, name this deformity which Polyphemus and other cyclops possess.

ANSWER: having one eye [accept equivalents.]

Result: 642 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 35110

Question: In one story, this figure has a dream in which her plants have caught on fire; she then murders a man to use his blood to put it out. A plant with roots that are all black and whose upper portion is all white is given to a man who visits her domain. As related in the Telegoneia, her illegitimate son kills his father with a spear that has been tipped with stingray poison. (*) Canens killed herself after this woman turned Picus into a woodpecker. Eurylochus escaped the charms of this woman, who lived on the island of Aeaea. Her might is silenced by moly, which is given by Hermes to a man whose followers were all turned into swine. For 10 points, name this sorceress from The Odyssey.

ANSWER: Circe

Result: 643 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 35150

Question: In one story, a barbarian king seeks this item out by cutting out the heart of a man who is so brave that his heart doesn't quaver with fear. This item is sought by King Atli from Hogni, though it originally belonged to a creature that died after a man dug a pit and hid in the hole so that he could avoid its blood. A body that is stuffed with this material is given to (*) Hreidmar after Loki mistook Otr for an otter. A story involving the god Ran lead the phrase "brightness of the sea" to be a kenning for this substance. Draupnir is an item that is made of it, as is the bristles of the boar Gullinbursti. For 10 points, name this treasure that comprises Sif's hair, hordes of which are guarded by the dragon Fafnir.

ANSWER: gold [Accept treasure of Fafnir or the gold of Fafnir]

Result: 644 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 35157

Question: The Book of the Two Ways describes how the souls of the dead would go to the "Mansion" of this. A heart-eating god of this domain appears in the Cannibal Hymn to help the king slay his enemies. An ancient, obscure god with this domain is named Iah. In one tale, an object associated with it was offered to Osiris, who ate it to come (*) back to life. That object, which was restored after being torn out in a fight, was represented by the left Wadjet eye. This item appears on the headdress of Khonsu, and this entity was the loser of a bet that extended the year to 365 days. For 10 points, name this object which appears on the headdress of Thoth and his Ibis bill as a crescent shape.

ANSWER: Moon [prompt on the left eye of Horus]

Result: 645 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 35223

Question: This figure once stole the horses of Heracles and refused to give them back until he slept with her, which resulted in three sons, one of whom fathered the Scythians. Hesiod states that she lived in Arima, where she was killed by Argus Panoptes. She was often conflated with Delphyne, who is sometimes credited with guarding a bag of sinews. Hesiod also records that she slept with one of her children to produce a (*) polycephalous inhabitant of the Lernaean Marshes. This drakaina was a daughter of Phorcys and Ceto that had children of her own, such as Geryon's two-headed dog and a part-lion, part-goat, fire-breathing monster. For 10 points name this mother of the Hydra and the Chimera, who produced her beastly offspring with her consort Typhon.

ANSWER: Echidna or Ekhidna

Result: 646 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 35212

Question: The last of Callimachus's hymns praises this figure for thrice-crossing the silver eddies of the river Achelous and sitting near the well of Callichorus. Apollodorus claims that she was the mother of a horse named Arion that was endowed with the gift of speech. In another venture, she, along with Hecate, asks for information from Helios. A group of sacred (*) trees dedicated to this goddess was cut down by Erysichthon, who sold his own daughter Mestra into slavery. This goddess was responsible for empowering Triptolemus. More notably, this mother of Core visited King Celeus and tried to burn away the mortal parts of Demophon. She went to Eleusis and taught agriculture to mankind. For 10 points, name this mother of Persephone, an ancient Greek goddess of agriculture.

ANSWER: Demeter or Ceres

Result: 647 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 35243

Question: Their arrival at Nemea caused Hypsipyle to abandon Opheltes in some grass, leading the latter to be devoured by a snake. In order to repulse the force led by them, a man was told to offer his son Menoiceus to Ares, but that son slit his own throat before he was sacrificed. One member of this group gave his daughters Argeia and Deipyle in marriage to another after seeing a pair of shields that contained a lion and a boar. They include a man who (*) devoured the brains of Melanippos, thus revolting Athena into not giving him immortality. A son of Atalanta and a man struck down by Zeus's lightning after climbing a ladder are two of them. Including Parthenopaeus and Capaneus, this group also included Polyneices. For 10 points, identify this numerically-named group which fought a war against Thebes.

ANSWER: Seven Against Thebes

Result: 648 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 35284

Question: In one story, Lord Vishnu endowed Narada with a beautiful body and the face of a hideous monkey since he boasted about slaying this god. Against most other sources, the Atharva Veda states that he was the creator of the world. He was given the epithet "Ananga" to reflect his incorporeal nature after Mahesvara killed him. In that story, he was about to shoot a meditating (*) Shiva. He is depicted as riding a giant parrot and holding a bow which was made out of a string of honeybees and sugarcane. This consort of Rati names a text which discusses the virtues of courtesans and other men's wives. For 10 points, name this Hindu god of love, whose erotic teachings can be found in a namesake sutra.

ANSWER: Kamadeva

Result: 649 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: Extra Tiebreakers | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 35429

Question: After killing a lion that roamed on top of the emperor's palace, Yorimasa received a wife named Ayame and one of these items called Shishi-O. A nomad named Benkei planned to build a temple once he acquired 1,000 of these objects, but he only acquired 999 before Yorisune beat him. Two divers go under the sea and find a jeweled passage to a land with a city of gold in a medieval legend that explains how one was lost during the (*) Gempei War. One of these objects was found in the fourth tail of an 8-headed creature. Amaterasu spat out a mist after she ate the three pieces of one that belonged to Susanowo. Along with beads and a mirror, one is an imperial regalia of Japan. For 10 points, name these objects which include the Kusanagi, and which are used by samurai to chop off heads.

ANSWER: swords [accept katanas]

Result: 650 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 35393

Question: In one legend from this country's mythos, an emperor of Rome seeks out a maiden named Elen after having a dream about her. A story written in the language of this country describes a mighty sorcerer who is able to put an entire kingdom to sleep every night so that he can steal its food. Lists of three items that describe this country's mythical history are part of its "Triads." A hero from this country's myths retrieves a comb and a pair of scissors that are nestled between the ears of a giant boar. Its villain of (*) Gwawl is foiled when a game of "badger in the bag" is played by the Lord of Dyved. Heroes described in a book of myths about this country include Bran the Blessed and Pwyll, the husband of Rhiannon. For 10 points, name this country whose stories are collected in the Mabinogion.

ANSWER: Wales [or Cymru, Prompt on Great Britain, Prompt on United Kingdom.]

Result: 651 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 35407

Question: (Note to moderator: please read the names mentioned in this question to yourself and familiarize yourself with their pronunciations before reading the tossup to the teams.) This god was the dedicatee of a festival whose name means "Lifting of the Banners." Diego Duran relates that this god wanted to sow discord, so he ordered his people to kidnap a princess and flay her. In the Bourbon Codex, this god is represented wielding a shield with four spears sticking out in one hand and a turquoise serpent or "fire serpent" in the other. This god sprang from his mother's womb to defeat the rebellion by his moon-goddess sister (*) Coyolxauhqui and her four hundred brothers. This god was conceived when his mother acquired a ball of feathers that fell from the sky. This god told his people to search for an eagle devouring a snake on a cactus. For 10 points, name this Aztec god, the patron of Tenochtitlan, whose name means "Hummingbird on the Left."

ANSWER: Huitzilopochtli

Result: 652 | DRAGOON | 2013 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 35418

Question: One of this man's sons was an ugly hunter known for carving a large rock sculpture of Cybele. Some sources state that his birth was probably the result of a relationship between Zeus and the nymph Plouto. This father of Broteas was both the maternal and paternal grandfather of a pair of children who murdered Chrysippus. Later, one of those grandchildren killed the other's sons and fed them to him. This grandfather of (*) Atreus and Thyestes had a daughter who turned to stone after her children were shot down. He also had a son who had his shoulder replaced with ivory after Demeter accidentally took a bite of him. For 10 points name this father of Niobe who was punished for feeding his son Pelops to the gods by being placed next to water and fruit he could never reach.

ANSWER: Tantalus

Result: 653 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 58543

Question: In Chinese mythology, the lower half of the goddess Nuwa was this type of creature. The blood of one of these creatures enabled Sigurd to understand the speech of birds after he slew Fafnir. Ra's enemy Apep was of this form, and the Ouroboros is one of these animals that swallows itself. In Hindu mythology, (*) nagas were this type of creature that were the enemy of Garuda, which the Aborigines also worship a Rainbow example of. Apollo slew one of these creatures to establish the Delphic oracle, and one appears in Norse mythology encircling the Earth. Jormungandr is the Midgard example of, for 10 points, what type of animal that hisses and slithers?

ANSWER: snake [accept serpent; accept dragon; accept specific species]

Result: 654 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 58945

Question: Along with Shu, this figure was sent to bring Tefnut back from Nubia after she fled there in the form of a lioness, leaving Egypt without water. A gambling match between this figure and Khonsu resulted in the births of Nut's children and the creation of the (*) lunar calendar. The inventor of magic, this deity assisted Isis in resurrecting her husband. When dead souls pass into the underworld this god weighs their hearts against a feather to judge whether they are worthy enough to pass into the afterlife. Commonly represented with the head of an ibis or a baboon, this is, for 10 points, what Egyptian god of writing and wisdom?

ANSWER: Thoth

Result: 655 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 58853

Question: One account of this deity's birth refers to him by the name Zagreus and describes his body being torn to shreds by the Titans. This god convinced Hephaestus to ascend to Mt. Olympus, and he himself replaced Hestia among the Twelve Olympians. In exchange for helping his satyr friend Silenus, this god awarded (*) Midas a single wish. After she was left behind on Naxos by Theseus, this god rescued Ariadne. Zeus saved this god by sewing him into his thigh after his mother Semele was burnt to ashes by seeing Zeus in his full glory. His frenzied female followers are known as Maenads. Also known as Bacchus, for 10 points, name this Greek god of wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus (accept Bacchus before mentioned)

Result: 656 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 58864

Question: This figure asked a dwarf riddles until the sun rose and the dwarf turned to stone. Grid gave this god iron gloves, which this god used to catch a molten ingot and slay the giant Geirrod. The cowardly giant Hymir foiled one of this god's fishing missions. This god journeyed with Thialfi and Loki to visit (*) Utgard-Loki, who had this god attempt to drink from the sea, wrestle old age, and lift the paw of a large cat. This god's chariot is drawn by two goats, and he dressed as Freya to retrieve his most famous item, which can level mountains. For 10 points, identify this son of Odin who wields Mjollnir and is a god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 657 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 13 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 58650

Question: This goddess was first wooed by her husband when he disguised himself as a cuckoo and hid in her bosom. Ixion was condemned to Tartarus for making advances on this goddess who blinded Tiresias after he ruled in favor of women in an argument. This goddess placed the eyes of the watchman (*) Argos in her favorite animal, the peacock. This goddess refused to allow Leto a place to give birth, sent a gadfly to sting Io, and placed snakes in the crib of Heracles, all out of jealousy over her husband's affairs. For 10 points, name this goddess of marriage, a wife of Zeus and queen of the Greek gods.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 658 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 14 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 59097

Question: One name for this goddess stems from her birthplace near the lake Tritonis. This goddess gave a box to the three daughters of Cecrops which contained the offspring of Hephaestus's failed attempts to rape this figure. In contrast to Poseidon's gift of a salt spring, this goddess gifted an (*) olive tree to a city desiring a name. This daughter of Metis sprung fully formed from another god's head, and had the epithets "Pallas" and "gray-eyed." She lost a weaving contest to Arachne, whom she turned into a spider. For 10 points, name this daughter of Zeus, a Greek goddess of wisdom who is equivalent to Minerva in Roman mythology.

ANSWER: Athena (accept any given name before mention)

Result: 659 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 58557

Question: In the Metamorphoses, this figure tells the tales of Ganymede and Pygmalion. Heracles was tutored by this man's brother Linus, and his head supposedly floated down the Hebrus River after he was killed by being torn to pieces. This demigod is crucial to protecting the Argonauts from the (*) Sirens. In one account, this man's wife is pursued by the satyr Aristaeus, causing her to be bitten and killed by a snake. This son of the epic muse Calliope lost his chance to save his love when he looked back while walking out of the underworld. For 10 points, name this lover of Eurydice who was amazing at playing the lyre.

ANSWER: Orpheus

Result: 660 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 58579

Question: In the Metamorphoses, this figure tells the tales of Ganymede and Pygmalion. Heracles was tutored by this man's brother Linus, and his head supposedly floated down the Hebrus River after he was killed by being torn to pieces. This demigod is crucial to protecting the Argonauts from the (*) Sirens. In one account, this man's wife is pursued by the satyr Aristaeus, causing her to be bitten and killed by a snake. This son of the epic muse Calliope lost his chance to save his love when he looked back while walking out of the underworld. For 10 points, name this lover of Eurydice who was amazing at playing the lyre.

ANSWER: Orpheus

Result: 661 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 58601

Question: In the Metamorphoses, this figure tells the tales of Ganymede and Pygmalion. Heracles was tutored by this man's brother Linus, and his head supposedly floated down the Hebrus River after he was killed by being torn to pieces. This demigod is crucial to protecting the Argonauts from the (*) Sirens. In one account, this man's wife is pursued by the satyr Aristaeus, causing her to be bitten and killed by a snake. This son of the epic muse Calliope lost his chance to save his love when he looked back while walking out of the underworld. For 10 points, name this lover of Eurydice who was amazing at playing the lyre.

ANSWER: Orpheus

Result: 662 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 58627

Question: In one story from this myth system, a god throws himself onto a funeral pyre after allowing himself to be seduced by another god who had previously battled the primordial crocodile Cipactli. The moon in this myth system is the head of a goddess which was tossed into the sky by her brother, who is represented as a (*) hummingbird. One god in this mythology replaced a foot with a smoking mirror; that god is Tezcatlipoca. The creator god of the mythology of this civilization was identified with the morning star and appeared as a feathered serpent. Quetzacoatl was a god of, for 10 points, what Mesoamerican civilization famously associated with human sacrifice?

ANSWER: Aztec

Result: 663 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 58674

Question: Odin asks his son Vidar to give up his seat to this figure during a feast in a work named after this god's "flyting." The horse Svadilfari was unable to finish building a wall because this figure turned into a mare to distract him; that adventure led to this figure becoming the father of Odin's (*) horse, Sleipnir. This figure once lost an eating contest to fire. This figure is bound by the entrails of his son Narfi to a rock where a serpent drips poison onto his face as punishment for this god's hand in the use of mistletoe to kill Balder. For 10 points, identify this trickster god of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 664 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 58700

Question: One member of this city kidnapped Chrysippus while teaching him chariot driving, and this city's walls were built by playing music to enchant stones. This city's king Pentheus was ripped to shreds by his mother Agave in a Bacchic frenzy. Its founder was told to stop where a cow laid down; that founder was (*) Cadmus. A notable Seven made war against this city, and one king of this city killed his father Laius at a crossroads. That king's wife stabbed out her own eyes after discovering she had married her son. That king answered "man" to a riddle to defeat the Sphinx which had terrified this city. For 10 points, name this ancient Greek city which Oedipus ruled.

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 665 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 58729

Question: This work opens with a king asserting the "lord's right" and his people praying for freedom from oppression and the hard labor of having to build a wall. The protagonist of this work is the son of the goddess Ninsun, and visits Utnapishtim, who is with his wife the only survivor of a great (*) Flood. The Bull of Heaven is sent to kill one character in this work after he spurns the advances of Ishtar. After the title character's friend the wild-man Enkidu dies in this epic, that character engages on a journey to find the secret of immortality. For 10 points, name this Sumerian epic about a King of Uruk.

ANSWER: the Epic of Gilgamesh

Result: 666 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 58768

Question: To resolve a paradox, one of these creatures was along with the Teumissian Fox turned to stone; that creature was named Laelaps. Eurytion owned a monstrous one of these animals which helped guard the cattle of Geryon and was killed by Heracles. The lower body of Scylla was made of these animals. One of these animals named (*) Argos died of old age upon finally seeing Odysseus again, while several of these attacked Actaeon after he was transformed by Artemis into a hind for spying her bathing while hunting. For 10 points, name this animal of which the three-headed guardian of the underworld Cerberus is an example.

ANSWER: dog or canine or hound (or other reasonable equivalents)

Result: 667 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 58783

Question: This figure's grandson gave his sons a magic fishhook and bow and was sent to earth by this figure with three gifts including a mirror, jewel, and sword to plant rice. This goddess became angry at her brother for killing a goddess of food and so refused to ever look at him again. She is venerated at the Ise Grand Shrine, and her parents are (*) Izanagi and Izanami. This goddess looked into a mirror after she was lured out of a cave by the dancing of another goddess; she had hid there after a flayed horse was thrown at her by her brother Susanoo. For 10 points, name this chief Shinto sun goddess of Japanese mythology.

ANSWER: Amaterasu

Result: 668 | JAMES | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 58796

Question: This man died when Lycomedes pushed him off a cliff. Though he is not Paris, he abducted Helen with the help of his friend Pirithous, who was stuck with him to the Seat of Oblivion in the underworld until Heracles rescued this figure by ripping his thighs off a chair. This man pushed (*) Sciron into a chasm with a turtle. This figure used a pine tree to kill Sinis, and he killed a man who fit people to beds, the bandit Procrustes. This man's father Aegeus killed himself after this man failed to lower black sails after performing his most famous action with the help of Ariadne. For 10 points, name this Athenian king who killed the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 669 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 31724

Question: A prophecy declared that this city would be safe if the king's son Menoeceus sacrificed himself. The walls of this city were built by a man who used a lyre to lift rocks, Amphion, and his brother Zethus. Adrastus was the leader of a group that attacked the gates of this city, and though they were defeated, the Epigoni's sack of it caused the death of a blind prophet who spent seven years as a woman. A king of this city was killed by the father of (*) Eteocles and Polynices; the son of that king, Laius, married his mother Jocasta. For ten points, name this Boeotian city founded by Cadmus that was home to Tiresias and Oedipus.

ANSWER: Thebes (prompt on "Boeotia" before mentioned)

Result: 670 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 44017

Question: This goddess granted Biton and Cleobis death after they pulled their mother's chariot for miles to a statue of this figure. The giant Porphyrion tried to rape this goddess before being struck by lightning and killed by an arrow. At her wedding, she received a tree that bore the Golden Apples of the Hesperides, and this figure was once (*) hung upside down with gold chains by her husband for rebelling against him. In the Judgment of Paris, she offered him rule over all of Europe and Asia. This goddess sent a gadfly to torment a woman disguised as a cow and threw her son off Olympus because of his ugliness. For ten points, name this mother of Hephaestus and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 671 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 46155

Question: According to some myths, this man was killed by a falling boulder from Mount Sipylus for harboring the golden dog that Pandareus stole. His daughter was turned into a weeping rock on Mount Sipylus, while his son beat Oenomaus in a chariot race to marry Hippodamia. This man's father invited him to dine on Olympus, only for this man to (*) steal some ambrosia and nectar. His son Pelops received an ivory shoulder after this man served him as food to the gods. For ten points, identify this man who suffers from perpetual thirst and hunger in the underworld.

ANSWER: Tantalus

Result: 672 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 46188

Question: In the Mahabharata, one god of this type is the father of the warrior Karna. Ares turned Alectryon into a rooster because he failed to warn Ares of the arrival of another god of it, which, in Hinduism, is represented by the god Surya. In Norse mythology, Mani is the brother of a goddess of this object who is chased by the wolf Skoll. A goddess of this (*) hid in a cave because her brother threw a flayed horse at her loom; that goddess had a brother named Susano'o and was named Amaterasu. The Greek god of this handed his chariot to his son Phaeton, who ended up scorching the Earth. For 10 points, name this daytime celestial body ruled by Helios.

ANSWER: Sun god (or solar deity/god; accept answers equivalent in meaning)

Result: 673 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 13 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 46200

Question: These figures killed Agrius and Thoon with bronze clubs during the Gigantomachy. While serving King Admetus, Apollo got these figures drunk in an attempt to save his life. They appeared after Meleager's birth and presented his mother with a piece of wood that his life depended upon. According to Herodotus, not even the gods could overcome the (*) judgement of these figures. In this group, Lachesis possessed a measuring rod, and Clotho spun the thread of life that Atropos cut. For ten points, identify this trio of Greek goddesses who had the power to determine destiny.

ANSWER: Fates (or Fata; or Moirae; accept Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos in any order before one of them is mentioned; do not accept "Parcae", since that is Roman)

Result: 674 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 14 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 46221

Question: Those who meet up after this event find golden playing pieces used by their predecessors. The main fighting during this occurs at a field called Vigrith, and after it, some men live in a hall called Sindri and others in Gimli. A series of three consecutive winters marks the beginning of this event, during which the ship (*) Naglfar is completed from the nails of the dead. The giant Surt sets fire to the world during this event, which is survived by two humans named Lif and Lifthrasir. Garm kills Tyr, and Fenrir swallows Odin in, for ten points, what apocalyptic event in Norse mythology?

ANSWER: Ragnarok

Result: 675 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 15 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 46267

Question: This figure's court hears the story of the death of Polites and Priam before an altar. The many-feathered Rumor takes news of this figure to the Gaetulian King Iarbas, and this woman's husband Sychaeus was slain by her brother Pygmalion. This sister of Anna falls in love with another man when a storm (*) traps them in a cave during a hunt. Earlier, she had been offered as much land as she could cover with a bull's hide, so she cut it apart and surrounded a circle of land in Tunisia, founding a city which would later war with Rome. For ten points, name this suicidal lover of Aeneas, the first Queen of Carthage.

ANSWER: Dido (or Elissa)

Result: 676 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 16 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 46284

Question: A white one of these animals named Uchchaihshravas was produced during the Churning of the Ocean and owned by Indra. The Celtic goddess Epona was worshipped as one of these animals. Hrungnir bet that one of these animals named Gullfaxi was better than another one who was the son of Svadilfari. Several particularly aggressive ones killed Diomedes of Thrace before Heracles took them. An (*) eight-legged one of these that belonged to Odin was Sleipnir. Zeus sent a gadfly to sting one of these animals, which resulted in Bellerophon falling to the ground even though he had tamed it with a golden bridle. For 10 points, name these animals, a winged one of which is Pegasus.

ANSWER: horses (accept stallions or mares)

Result: 677 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 43763

Question: The man who discovered this object had ruled the kingdom of Sarras for a year and only his companion Bors the Younger remained alive after viewing it. Only the man who retrieved this object could (*) sit on the Siege Perilous, which had kept Joseph of Arimathea alive while he was in prison. This object was said to be located in the home of the wounded Fisher King, who would be healed once this item was found. Percival managed to see it without comprehending its significance, but Lancelot's son Galahad succeeded in the quest to find this item. For ten points, name this sacred chalice sought by the Knights of the Round Table.

ANSWER: Holy Grail

Result: 678 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57254

Question: The man who discovered this object had ruled the kingdom of Sarras for a year and only his companion Bors the Younger remained alive after viewing it. Only the man who retrieved this object could (*) sit on the Siege Perilous, which had kept Joseph of Arimathea alive while he was in prison. This object was said to be located in the home of the wounded Fisher King, who would be healed once this item was found. Percival managed to see it without comprehending its significance, but Lancelot's son Galahad succeeded in the quest to find this item. For ten points, name this sacred chalice sought by the Knights of the Round Table.

ANSWER: Holy Grail

Result: 679 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 43780

Question: Aglauros and Herse went mad and jumped to their deaths after disobeying this deity, who had told the daughters of Cecrops to not open a box that held a boy disguised as a snake. That boy was a son of Gaia and Hephaestus even though the latter had tried to rape this goddess instead. Marsyas picked up a flute that she (*) invented but eventually discarded because it disfigured her face. Homer often refers to this figure as "gray-eyed", and as Mentor, she helps Odysseus leave for the Trojan War and return home to Ithaca. One of her symbols is the owl, and she was born from Metis in Zeus's head. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of wisdom.

ANSWER: Pallas Athena (accept Athene; accept Athena Parthenos)

Result: 680 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 57271

Question: Aglauros and Herse went mad and jumped to their deaths after disobeying this deity, who had told the daughters of Cecrops to not open a box that held a boy disguised as a snake. That boy was a son of Gaia and Hephaestus even though the latter had tried to rape this goddess instead. Marsyas picked up a flute that she (*) invented but eventually discarded because it disfigured her face. Homer often refers to this figure as "gray-eyed", and as Mentor, she helps Odysseus leave for the Trojan War and return home to Ithaca. One of her symbols is the owl, and she was born from Metis in Zeus's head. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of wisdom.

ANSWER: Pallas Athena (accept Athene; accept Athena Parthenos)

Result: 681 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 43801

Question: This figure was healed with milk after his eyes were gouged out to become the Sun and Moon. The crocodile god Sobek devised a trap to recover this god's hands from the Nile. A god of silence depicted as a child holding a finger to his mouth is this god's younger form of Harpokrates, and his sons guarded the canopic jars. In a series of contests for the control of Egypt, he harpooned a hippopotamus, (*) raced in stone boats, and contaminated his opponent's lettuce. This god's wife was Hathor, and he was conceived when his mother Isis impregnated herself by the dead Osiris. For ten points, name this falcon-headed Egyptian god who warred with his uncle Set.

ANSWER: Horus (accept Neferhor or Harsiesis or Harpokrates before mention)

Result: 682 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 43804

Question: A god of one of these entities named Alpheus pursued the nymph Arethusa until Artemis transformed her. Heracles won Deianeira's hand in marriage after wrestling one god of these called Achelous. Hephaestus stopped another god of these from killing Achilles before his battle with Hector; that one was named Scamander. The (*) Phlegethon was one made of fire, while one of these that surrounded the cave of Hypnos and had the ability to cleanse all memories from the dead was named Lethe. The gods swore unbreakable oaths on a black one of these, which the dead paid to be ferried across. For ten points, name these bodies of water, one of which was the Styx.

ANSWER: rivers (accept river gods)

Result: 683 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 43893

Question: This figure's possessions Megingjorth and Jarngreipr will be inherited after his death by his sons Modi and Magni. A whetstone remains stuck in his head after his fight with Hrungnir, and he has his weapon stolen by Thrym. That weapon was made by the dwarf Brokkr and has a (*) shortened handle due to Loki's interference. Loki also cut off the golden hair of this god's wife Sif, and this man fails to lift what seems to be a cat at the castle of Utgard-Loki. This figure will walk nine paces after killing his nemesis, the Midgard Serpent. For 10 points, identify this wielder of the hammer Mjolnir and Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 684 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 43931

Question: After his death, this man married Medea in the Isles of the Blessed. Odysseus found him disguised as a princess in the court of King Lycomedes of Skyros after this figure showed more interest in weapons than trinkets. After his consort Briseis is taken away, this father of Neoptolemus refuses to fight. The Iliad opens with the (*) "Rage" of this figure, whose friend Patroclus died while fighting in this man's armor. He mangled the body of Hector after their duel, and this son of Peleus and Thetis was nearly invulnerable because he had been bathed in the Styx as a child. For ten points, name this Greek hero killed by an arrow to the heel.

ANSWER: Achilles (or Akhilleus)

Result: 685 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 43943

Question: Demeter punished Erysichthon for destroying one of these sacred to her. In the Volsung Saga, Sigmund pulled a sword out of one named Barnstokkr. Hermes and Zeus rewarded Baucis and Philemon by having them turn into two of these objects instead of dying, and in Egyptian mythology, Isis finds Osiris' coffin stuck in one of them. (*) Ratatoskr relays insults between an eagle sitting on one of these and a dragon named Nidhogg gnawing on it. Spirits of these in Greek mythology were known as dryads, while Daphne was turned into one to escape Apollo's pursuit. Yggdrasil is among the "World" type of, for ten points, what objects exemplified by the ash and the oak?

ANSWER: trees [accept ash, oak, laurel, or more specific types of trees; accept Yggdrasil; do not accept "forest"]

Result: 686 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 43954

Question: This deity smeared ash on his head three times after his form of Tripurantaka fought three cities. This god is alternatively called Pashupati and resides as a yogi in Mount Kailash. The Ganges River flows through the matted hair of this rider of the bull Nandi, who burned the god of love to ashes. He is commonly depicted standing by a form of his wife named (*) Kali, or with a snake around his neck and a trident in his right arm. Often worshipped through a lingam, this god fathered Kartikeya and Ganesha with his wife Parvati. For ten points, name this Hindu destroyer god.

ANSWER: Shiva (accept Siva, Rudra, Nataraja, Neelkantha, or Shankara)

Result: 687 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 43976

Question: One of this woman's sons accidentally killed his father with a stingray-tipped spear and was named Telegonus. This inhabitant of Aeaea purified the Argonauts for the murder of Absyrtus, and her rejection by Glaucus led her to concoct a potion that turned Scylla into a monster. After being confronted with a sword, she swore by the gods not to take a certain hero's manhood. (*) Hermes gave his great-grandson moly to protect him from this woman, who had laced her food with a transforming potion. For ten points, name this witch who turned Odysseus' men into swine.

ANSWER: Circe (or Kirke)

Result: 688 | LIST | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 44002

Question: These people worshipped an agricultural god known as "Our Lord the Flayed One". The war god of these people killed his sister and 400 of her siblings because they had attacked his mother for being impregnated by a ball of feathers. Humanity was created after bones were brought back from their underworld of Mictlan, to which Xolotl guided the dead. Another god of these people had a rival with an obsidian (*) "smoking mirror" for a foot; that rival exiled these peoples' "feathered serpent" on a raft of snakes. For ten points, identify these Mesoamerican people who sacrificed humans and worshipped Tezcatlipoca and Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Aztec mythology (or Aztecs or Aztec civilization/people]

Result: 689 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 52200

Question: The nymph Halia bore six sons to this deity, who was forced to curse them after they raped their mother in a bout of insanity caused by Aphrodite on Rhodes. This god turned Caenis into a man, and fathered Pelias with Tyro and Despoina and Arion with Demeter after turning himself into a stallion. His affair with Scylla caused his wife Amphitrite to turn her into a horrible monster, and Medusa was cursed by Athena for fornicating in her temple with this god. For 10 points, name this creator of a salt spring that was inferior to Athena's olive tree, a Greek deity who created horses and ruled the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon [accept Neptune until "Greek" is read]

Result: 690 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 52411

Question: One of these creatures, the Druk, is the protector of Bhutan and lends its name to Bhutanese kings. An "Azure" one of these rules the East in Chinese astrology, and the Slayer's Slab commemorates the killer of one of these inhabitants of knuckerholes in Sussex. Susano'o retrieved the sword Kusanagi from the corpse of Yamata no Orochi, one of these, and another emerged from the Luo River and gifted Fu Hsi with the secrets of writing. Hercules slew one of these creatures named Ladon that guarded the Apples of the Hesperides. For 10 points, identify these legendary creatures that capture fair damsels and breathe fire.

ANSWER: dragons [accept serpents]

Result: 691 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 52432

Question: Hippotes slew Carnus, a lover of this deity, who was only placated when Hippotes was banished. Cypress trees weep forever because this god's lover Cyparissus slew a tame deer. One of this god's sons, Cinyras, challenged him to a contest and killed himself when he lost. This god battled Tityos to protect his mother, and, for reporting the infidelity of Coronis, crows were turned black by this servant of Admetus. This deity slew a monster beside the Castalian Spring, so he was worshipped as Pythius, and this pursuer of Daphne killed the children of Niobe. For 10 points, name this Greek god of music, the brother of Artemis, whose oracle resided at Delphi.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 692 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 52453

Question: The giantess Modgud is the guardian of a bridge to one of these locations, and that one of these locations is guarded by the watchdog Garmr, who is destined to slay Týr at Ragnorak. Aeacus, a virtuous king of Aegina, shares a job with Rhadamanthus and Minos in one of these. Sinful Egyptian entrants to this location would have their souls eaten by Ammit the Destroyer, and Greeks who were sent here could drink from the river Lethe. For 10 points, name these often subterranean locations where Charon might ferry you across the river Acheron.

ANSWER: Underworlds [accept equivalents]

Result: 693 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 52242

Question: In the Arabian Nights, Talib journeys to the City of Brass to meet a mummy queen who has these objects made of quicksilver. In the same story, birds scatter these objects belonging to ifrits across the whole world. The Japanese mythical creature Tenome has these in its palms, and in Zoroastrianism, the Chinvat Bridge is guarded by dogs with abnormal numbers of these. Typhon shot fire from these, and the goddess Wadjet was associated with one of these belonging to Horus. As part of a deal with Mimir, Odin sacrificed one of these to gain knowledge. For 10 points, name these body parts, of which Argus had a hundred and the Cyclops only had one.

ANSWER: Eyes

Result: 694 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 52291

Question: This deity killed a dwarf disguised as an otter with a stone while staying with that dwarf's father Hreidmar. This god's brother was Byleistr, and he stole the ring of Andvari, which he used to pay for Otr's blood money. He disguised himself as the old woman Thökk, and seduced a male horse to avoid punishment for allowing the hrimthurs to use Svaðlfari to build the walls of Asgard. This god tricked Hodr into throwing a spear of mistletoe that killed Baldr, for which crime this god is bound to a rock with poison dripping in his face, and some of this god's offspring are the horse Sleipnir and the wolf Fenrir. For 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 695 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 52316

Question: After stealing "mes" from one deity, this deity was pursued by sea monsters known as Abgallu, although she successfully escaped. While in the underworld, this deity had to be revived by the water of life after an incident in which she was forced to shed an article of clothing at each gate she passed, as part of this deity's failed attempt to retrieve her consort Tammuz. This deity once asked Gilgamesh to be her new lover, but he refused, reminded by the ill fate that befell each of her previous consorts. For 10 points, name this Mesopotamian goddess of fertility, love, and sex.

ANSWER: Ishtar [accept Inanna]

Result: 696 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 52348

Question: This god's soul was worshiped in its own right as Banebjedet, who, though not Amun, was symbolized by a ram. The sea god Nu owned the Neshmet barge which carried this deity to a five-day festival, where the Procession of Wepwawet "opened the ways" for this Foremost of Westerners. A palace in Byblos was built with the tree that contained this god's coffin, and Egyptians reviled a certain species of fish because they ate this god's dismembered phallus. For 10 points, name this Egyptian deity of agriculture and resurrection, the ruler of the Duat, whose wife Isis reassembled his body for him to become the Lord of the Dead.

ANSWER: Osiris

Result: 697 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 52362

Question: One aspect of this deity had cylindrical temples that reduced air resistance and was worshipped for igniting the sun. That aspect was the wind god Ehecatl, and the world's largest pyramid, located in Cholula, was dedicated to this god. Another aspect of this god personified the Morning Star, which this god's heart became after he immolated himself from the shame of sleeping with his sister, which he had been tricked into doing by Tezcatlipoca. He created the Fifth Race by grinding bones from Mictlan, and he may have been confused for Cortés, which expedited the conquest of Tenochtitlan. For 10 points, name this Aztec feathered serpent deity.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 698 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 52379

Question: In one legend, this figure vanquished Lucius Tiberius but was later forced to hand his crown to Constantine III, son of Cador. A Triad recorded that Guinevak's slap to this man's wife was one of the "Three Harmful Blows" that led to the Battle of Camlann, during which this man's son by his half-sister Morgause mortally wounded him. He was conceived when Igraine of Tintagel slept with his father disguised as Gorlois; she later bore Morgan le Fay, who threw Excalibur to the Lady of the Lake. For 10 points, name this son of Uther Pendragon who was betrayed by his wife Guinevere and helped by the wizard Merlin.

ANSWER: King Arthur

Result: 699 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 52388

Question: This deity decapitated one of the five heads of one of his counterparts, leaving that god with only four. This god is often depicted trampling the dwarf of ignorance, Apasmara, as the eternal dancer Nataraja. He often rides the bull Nandi, and his son Kartikeya lost a contest with his other son, who simply circumambulated this god. Halahala left over from the churning of the sea was drunk by this god to save the world, but it turned his throat blue. Worship of this god usually involves linga, or sacred stones, and he severed an elephant's head to replace his son Ganesha's. For 10 points, name this husband of Parvati, the destroyer of the Hindu Trimurti.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 700 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 52400

Question: This man's sons Demophon and Acamas rescued his mother from Castor and Pollux, who had kidnapped her. This slayer of the Crommyonian Sow was sheltered by Hecale on his way to kill the Marathonian Bull and pushed Sciron off a cliff. Under the pretense of checking whether it was bronze, this figure stole Periphetes's club and killed him with it. His father sent tribute to repay for the death of Androgeus at the Pan-Athenian Games, and was named Aegeus. This hero abandoned Ariadne on Naxos; she had earlier given him a ball of string to help him remember his way. For 10 points, name this hero who navigated the Labyrinth to slay the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 701 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 52404

Question: One myth featuring this figure describes his promise to the shepherd Prosymnus, who died before this figure could consummate a relationship with him, and following his birth he was raised on Mount Nysa. This figure also supposedly married Ariadne after Theseus had abandoned her, and he fathered Priapus with the goddess Aphrodite. After being kidnapped, he turned a number of pirates into dolphins, and he caused Pentheus to be brutally dismembered by a crowd of madwomen known as the Maenads. For 10 points, name this Greek god of wine, who was known to the Romans as Bacchus.

ANSWER: Dionysus [accept Bacchus until mention]

Result: 702 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 52480

Question: In Apollonius's Argonautica, Eros cheats this figure in a game of knucklebones. Eos was compensated for losing this figure with the granting of immortality to her lover Tithonus, who was eventually turned into a cricket because he was not given eternal youth. Hera's jealousy caused this figure to be set in the stars as Aquarius, appropriately near the constellation Aquila. This figure's father Tros was given two heavenly horses in exchange for this figure's abduction from Mount Ida, and he supplanted Hebe as cupbearer of the gods. For 10 points, name this Trojan boy abducted by Zeus in the form of an eagle.

ANSWER: Ganymede

Result: 703 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2013 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 52507

Question: In one tradition, this figure killed a baby by letting it suck on a piece of flint, and later burned a rock to death after it started to chase him. He created the Multnomah Falls in order to provide a bathing pool for his beloved, according to Chinook legend, and another myth states that one of his eyes got stuck in the sky while he was juggling, where it became the star Arcturus. The Nez Perce believe that this figure killed a giant monster by cutting its heart out from the inside, using its entrails to name different tribes, while other stories credit him with creating the world by kicking a ball of mud. For 10 points, name this canine Native American trickster deity.

ANSWER: Coyote

Result: 704 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: DartmouthA | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 37391

Question: A virgin goddess in this myth system becomes pregnant after eating fruit containing the sperm of the moon god. In this myth system, the first humans are a race of dimwitted giants created by breathing into stones who are wiped out and replaced by a new group created from smaller rocks. One god in this myth system keeps the Milky Way in a jug and uses it to create rain; that god is Ilyapa. In this mythology, a man plants a golden staff into the ground to mark the site where a new city will be constructed; that man is the son of a god represented by a golden disk with a human face. This mythology features realms known as Pachas and the creator god Viracocha. For 10 points, name this Andean mythology whose sun god Inti is the father of Manco Capac.

ANSWER: Incan mythology

Result: 705 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: DartmouthJensen | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 37367

Question: Ibn Gabirol dispatched a female one of these beings after having sex with it. According to one legend, the body of the most famous of these beings can still be found in an attic. In some accounts, these beings can be destroyed by walking around them and saying words backwards to reverse the process that created them, although they are more typically defeated by erasing one of the letters on their forehead or reaching into their mouths and taking out a scroll inscribed with the name of God called a shem. These non-jinni beings are bound to literally obey commands. In 1580, one of these beings was created by the Maharal in order to defend Prague's ghetto. For 10 points, name these robot-like beings created from unformed material like clay in Jewish folklore.

ANSWER: golems

Result: 706 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 36962

Question: One deity in this myth system cured a princess of an illness to earn her hand in marriage only to have her father try to kill him by sending him into a hopeless battle at the command of a battalion of dwarves. Another deity in this myth system transformed into a black ant so that he could follow a red ant to a stash of crops beneath a mountain. Nine was considered an unlucky number in this myth system, as their underworld had nine levels. Figures in this myth system include four hundred rabbits who preside over inebriation and a woman who was impregnated by a ball of feathers. Two rivals in this myth system have names translating as "Smoking Mirror" and "Feathered Serpent." For 10 points, name this myth system including Tezcatlipoca and Quetzalcoatl, held sacred by a pre-Columbian empire in Mexico.

ANSWER: Aztec mythology

Result: 707 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors10 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 37396

Question: This man was told to sleep in a temple of Athena by the seer who restored Glaucus to life, Polyeidos. This man fathered Laodamia, the mother of Sarpedon, after marrying Philonoe. Poseidon flooded the plain of Xanthus at a request from this man, who had earlier defeated the Solymi and the Amazons. In one story, this figure killed Deliades, after which he fled as a suppliant to Proetus, who wanted Iobates to kill him. This man was pursued by a woman named either Anteia or Stheneboea, who accused him of seducing her. This man killed a monster by putting a block of lead in its mouth, which occurred after he captured another creature using a golden bridle. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who killed the Chimera with the help of Pegasus.

ANSWER: Bellerophontes

Result: 708 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors11 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 37434

Question: Using a horoscope, an astrologer calculated that this figure was born during an eclipse and died during another eclipse. According to some stories, this figure employed a builder named Celer, who was the namesake of his personal guard. This figure's wife was deified as the goddess Hora, while this figure himself is said to have been deified as the god Quirinus. In some accounts, he killed his brother for jumping over a wall he built. This figure claimed that since he saw twelve birds, instead of just six, he had the right to build a city on the Palatine Hill, rather than the Aventine Hill. After building that city, he ordered the rape of the Sabine women. For 10 points, name this mythological founder of Rome, the twin brother of Remus.

ANSWER: Romulus

Result: 709 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors2 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 36988

Question: This figure's daughter gave his eventual son-in-law scarves that saved him from snakes, centipedes, and wasps. That son-in-law was forced to bring back an arrow from a field set on fire. Earlier, this figure produced five men from a necklace while his sword was used to produce three women. This god turned a woman into a comb that he placed in his hair, and had eight cups full of sake placed at entries into a house. This deity slew the dragon Orochi, after which he took the sword Kusanagi and offered it to his sister. This god also threw a flayed horse through that sister's sewing room. He was born after his father Izanagi washed his nose. For 10 points, name this brother of Tsukuyomi and Amaterasu, the Shinto god of storms.

ANSWER: Susanoo

Result: 710 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors3 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 37020

Question: In the Skaldskaparmal, it is said this goddess has a grandfather rich in gold named Olvaldi. Loki ties his scrotum to a nanny goat's beard in order to make this goddess laugh, and she later places a dripping serpent above him. This goddess's father kidnapped Idunn in the form of an eagle, after which he was burned and killed by the Aesir. As part of her wergild, this goddess married a god that had two children with his sister; those three are the most notable Vanir gods. Whenever she had to stay at watery Noatun, she always longed for Thiassi's mountain hall. This jotünn is the stepmother of Frey and Freya, because although she wanted to marry Baldr, she unwittingly chose Njord instead because of his clean feet. For 10 points, name this Norse goddess of winter.

ANSWER: Skadi

Result: 711 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors4 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 37041

Question: In one legend, this man founded the city of Ephyra, which was filled with people created from mushrooms, although in another, he was given the city by Medea. This man fathered two sons with Tyro, and then blamed their death on his brother, Salmoneus. After branding the hooves of his cows, this man discovered they were being stolen by Autolycus. Following the death of his nephew Melicertes, this man founded the Isthmian games. This figure's demise started when he told the river god Asopus about Zeus's abduction of Aegina. This man managed to handcuff either Hades or Thanatos, and later told his wife Merope to leave him unburied, allowing him to come back to the world of the living. For 10 points, name this figure from Greek myth who was punished to eternally roll a boulder up a hill.

ANSWER: Sisyphus

Result: 712 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors4 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 37052

Question: A phenomenological school of thought within this tradition was founded by the half-brothers Asanga and Vasubandhu, and posits a list of eight primary consciousnesses. In this tradition, expedient means used to achieve enlightenment are known as upayas, which are commonly illustrated using the parable of the burning house or the image of an empty fist. The Madhyamaka school of this tradition was founded by the philosopher Nagarjuna. Texts n this tradition include the "Heart" and "Diamond" ones, which discuss the perfection of wisdom, and the Lotus Sutra. For 10 points, name this "Great Vehicle" which is one of the two major branches of Buddhism along with Theravada.

ANSWER: Mahayana Buddhism [prompt on Buddhism; anti-prompt on Pure Land, Zen, Nichiren, and Tiantai, which are all Mahayana schools]

Result: 713 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors5 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 37067

Question: One deity in this myth system was symbolized by four arrows pointing in different directions. An evil deity in this myth system gave birth to the Nine Diseases. This system's creation myth involved a duck laying three eggs on the knee of a floating goddess. One figure in this myth system has sex with his sister, causing her to kill herself, and later takes revenge by killing the tribe of Untamo. Another figure from this system is impregnated by eating a lingonberry. One deity in this myth system created thunderstorms by having sex with his wife, Akka, and wielded a namesake hammer, Ukonvasara. The primary account of this system includes the forging of the Sampo, is set in such realms as Pohjola and Tuonela, and was compiled by Elias Lonnrot. For 10 points, name this myth system chronicled in the Kalevala that originates in a Scandinavian country.

ANSWER: Finnish mythology [accept word forms]

Result: 714 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors6 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 37089

Question: A group led by this figure took in eighty women from Cyprus in order to provide wives for men in the party. This figure ordered her servants to throw away bags supposedly filled with gold, but actually full of sand, in order to avoid returning to her brother. This figure was desired by the Gaetulian king Iarbas, and surrounded a hill with strips of oxhide in order to gain land. This figure flew from Tyre soon after her husband, either Acerbas or Sychaeus, was killed on account of his wealth by her brother Pygmalion. This woman tells her sister Anna to create a pyre so she may burn the items of a certain man, whom she ignores when he meets her in the underworld. For 10 points, name this queen of Carthage who committed suicide after being left by Aeneas.

ANSWER: Dido

Result: 715 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors7 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 37111

Question: In one story, while pretending to be a baby, this man ate the finger of a giant. Although water from his hands had healing powers, this man only agreed to bring water for a dying man after the request of his grandson Oscar. This hero stayed awake by sticking the point of his spear into his forehead before killing the fire-breathing fairy Aillen. This figure's hounds, Bran and Sceolan, recognized his future wife, who was in the form of a deer. With that woman, Sadhbh, this man fathered Oisin. After abducting his mother Muirne, this man's father was killed by Goll mac Morna, who took over leadership of the Fianna. For 10 points, name this character from Irish mythology who gained knowledge by sucking on his thumb after burning it on the Salmon of Knowledge.

ANSWER: Finn MacCool [or Fionn mac Cumhaill; or Deinme]

Result: 716 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors8 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 37130

Question: Adrastus was told to yoke a lion and one of these animals to a chariot, so he married one of his daughters to Polynices. One of Ysbaddaden's tasks for Culhwch is to hunt one of these animals named Twrch Trwyth. Finn McCool delayed healing Diarmuid Ua Duibhne, who had been injured by one of these animals. Hiranyaksha was killed by Varaha, an Avatar of Vishnu who took the form of this animal. Hercules's fourth labor was to capture one of these animals from Mount Erymanthos. One of these animals was made along with Mjollnir and Draupnir by the dwarves Eitri and Brokkr, and belonged to Frey, while another of these animals killed Adonis. One of these animals was hunted by heroes including Meleager and Atalanta. For 10 points, name these animals, examples of which include Gullinbursti and the Calydonian one.

ANSWER: boars [prompt on pigs]

Result: 717 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Editors9 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 37163

Question: In Nepal, this god is depicted as a five-headed figure riding a lion and is called Heramba. At this god's temples, one can whisper wishes into his mount's ear to relay to him. This god injured the moon by throwing a body part at it after it laughed at him for tying his stomach together with a snake to keep candy from coming out. This god is said to have agreed to transcribe the Mahabharata for Vyasa only if he would recite it without interruption. To win a fruit, this Lord of Beginnings was told to race with his brother around the world, after which he rode a mouse around his parents because he said a little boy's parents were his world. Earlier, this god had hurt a cat, not realizing that the cat was his mother Parvati in disguise. This god was born beautiful, but lost his head after his father Shiva cut it off. For 10 points, name this elephant-headed "remover of obstacles" from Hindu myth.

ANSWER: Ganesha

Result: 718 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Haverford | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 37168

Question: This deity is praised at the beginning of the Agushaya hymn. Thorkild Jacobsen argued that the Burney Relief depicts this deity, because of the presence of the rod-and-ring symbol and lions, in addition to other evidence. This deity is cursed with sixty diseases by Namtar. In one story, this deity has to shed seven items of clothing in order to pass through seven gates. In another story, this deity threatens to open the doors of Hell and bring up the dead. This goddess enters the realm of her sister Ereshkigal in order to rescue her lover Tammuz from the underworld. This goddess releases the Bull of Heaven to attack Gilgamesh after he refuses to sleep with her. For 10 points, name this Sumerian goddess of love and war.

ANSWER: Ishtar [or Inanna]

Result: 719 | Michigan Fall Tournament | 2013 | Round: Louisville | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 37204

Question: A son of Poseidon named Euphemus who participated in the Calydonian hunt was also a member of this group. Some of these people were descended from members of the Minyan tribe, which is why they are sometimes called the Minyans. This group rescued the four sons of Chalciope from a desert island. They released a dove in between a pair of rocks which randomly clashed together called the Symplegades, on the advice of Phineus. A society of women led by Hypsipyle tried to prevent this group from leaving the island of Lemnos. This group was led by a son of Aeson who entered Iolcus wearing only one sandal, thus fulfilling a prophecy regarding the overthrow of Pelias. For 10 points, name this group of heroes who sailed in search of the Golden Fleece under the leadership of Jason.

ANSWER: Argonauts [accept Minyans before mentioned]

Result: 720 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 31155

Question: One source claims that this deity was wounded while defending the Pylians. This deity's servant Ascalaphus was transformed into a screech-owl, while Heracles crushed the ribs of another of his servants, the herdsman Menoetes. One of his lovers, Leuce, was transformed into a white poplar, while another of his lovers was trampled by another goddess, who turned her into a mint plant. Eubuleus and Eumolpus witnessed an event involving this god at the (*) plains of Nysa. He gave his invisibility-granting helmet to Perseus, while his keys were guarded by Aeacus, who lived in this god's domain. His orchards produced the pomegranates that he used to secure several months' time with the wife he abducted, Persephone. For 10 points, name this oldest male child of Cronus and Rhea, the Greek god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Hades [or Pluto; or Plouton; or Aides; or Aidoneus; do not accept "Dis Pater" or "Orcus"]

Result: 721 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 31343

Question: According to the Tale of the Two Brothers, this god produced a stream in order to protect Bata. This god was worshipped in the form of the all-black oracular Mnevis bull. His saliva was mixed with some dust and formed into a snake, which poisoned and immobilized him, allowing a goddess to interrogate him and learn his true name. The deifications of perception and command, Sia and Hu, were said to accompany this god during his time on the Mesektet and the (*) Mandjet. In another story, he mixed beer with ocher or hematite to pacify Sekhmet. During his travels through Duat, he fought the evil serpent Apep. He, or a god with whom he was syncretized, created Shu and Tefnut by masturbating, and he was worshipped at Heliopolis. For 10 points, identify this god with whom Atum and Amun were regularly syncretized, the Egyptian god of the sun.

ANSWER: Ra [or Re; accept Amun-Ra or Atum-Ra or Re-Horakhty; prompt on those other names on their own]

Result: 722 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 31365

Question: One story tells of how this character causes Ettarde to die of sorrow upon being refused by Pelleas. Launceor of Ireland dies while attempting to avenge this character's death, which occurs when a long-held kin feud results in this character's decapitation by Balin. King Ban's death at the hands of Claudas directly leads to this character raising Ban's sons, including Lionel, Bors, and their brother. After the Battle of Camlann, a dying wish results in this character being visited by either Griflet or (*) Bedivere. This figure is often identified with a student of Merlin who used magic to trap Merlin in a cave or tree. This character's most important appearance comes after another character loses a jousting match to Pellinor, breaking his old sword in the process. For 10 points, identify this foster mother of Lancelot, sometimes known as "Viviane" or "Nimue", who gave King Arthur the sword Excalibur.

ANSWER: the Lady of the Lake [accept Nimue or Viviane before they are read; accept Niniane, Nivian, Nyneve, Evienne, or other close linguistic equivalents; prompt on "Elaine"]

Result: 723 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 31380

Question: According to one story, this man fathered Illyrius after leading the Enchelean army to victory over the Illyrians. He married one of his daughters to Echion, a member of a group of early allies of this man that also included Pelorus, Udaeus, Hyperenor, and Chthonius. He was the first person to mine near mount Pangaeon in Thrace, where he buried his mother Telephassa, and he also introduced the alphabet to the Greeks. Like his brothers Thasus, Cilix, and (*) Phoenix, he was sent on an expedition out of Phoenicia by his father Agenor. While on that quest, the Delphic Oracle told him to follow a cow which took him to a location near the Ismenian spring, at which he killed a dragon whose teeth he then sowed. Zeus gave Harmonia in marriage to, for 10 points, which hero, whose search for his sister Europa led him to found Thebes?

ANSWER: Cadmus [or Kadmos]

Result: 724 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 31183

Question: This deity was known as the "frequenter of Vagasker and Singasteinn", the latter of which was the site at which he fought a son of Farbauti in the form of a seal. A lost poem about this gold-toothed god apparently relates a story in which he was pierced by a man's head, explaining why a kenning for sword is "[this god's] head". This deity fought Loki to recover Brisingamen for Freya and fathered the three races of man in the guise of (*) Rig. He owns the golden-maned horse Gulltoppr and lives in Himinbjörg. The daughters of Aegir are sometimes identified with the nine maidens who gave birth to him. He sleeps less than a bird and can hear both grass and wool growing from his position at Bifrost, and he will use his most famous possession to signal Ragnarok. For 10 points, identify this owner of Gjallarhorn, the sentinel of the Aesir.

ANSWER: Heimdallr [accept Rigr until it is read]

Result: 725 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 31191

Question: One myth claims that this god hung out with a tribe of pirates called the Sintians, while another asserts that he spent nine years in a grotto with Eurynome and Thetis. Most sources agree that the mysterious Cabeiri were his children, as was a one-eyed wielder of a bronze club who was killed by Theseus. This father of Periphetes arranged for his servant Cedalion to guide the blinded Orion and failed in his attempt to rape Athena, which resulted in his fathering (*) Erichthonius on Gaia. In one myth, Dionysus gets him drunk and puts him on the back of a mule, which carried him back to Olympus. He married the Grace Aglaea after finding Ares in bed with his wife Aphrodite. His creations include Pelops's shoulder, Hermes's winged sandals, and the Aegis. For 10 points, name this son of Zeus and Hera, the Greek god of fire and the forge.

ANSWER: Hephaestus [or Hephaistos; prompt on "Vulcan"]

Result: 726 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 31225

Question: This character receives a comforting vision of Iphthime and explains that fatuous and meaningful dreams come through ivory and horn gates, respectively. This figure's father married the nymph Periboea and made winning a footrace a precondition for marrying her. Many late myths were invented to explain the fact that she shares a name with the nymph from Mount Cyllene who gave birth to Pan. This daughter of (*) Icarius determines a stranger's identity by setting out a challenge to shoot an arrow through twelve axe-shaft rings and by asking a trick question involving her bed, which was built into an olive tree. Each night, she unraveled part of a shroud she was weaving for her father-in-law Laertes as part of a ruse intended to delay the many suitors who had come to Ithaca seeking her. For 10 points, name this mother of Telemachus, the faithful wife of Odysseus.

ANSWER: Penelope

Result: 727 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 31246

Question: One aspect of this god attempted to shoot the sun with an arrow but ended up shooting himself. Temples to another of his aspects were constructed as cylinders in order to reduce wind resistance. Also known by the calendar name "One Reed", he used his blood and the ground bones of four previous races of man to construct the humans of the fifth age. This deity once drunkenly slept with either a temple priestess or his own sister, then burned himself to death, due to the machinations of a fellow son of (*) Ometeotl. His heart became the morning star, while the evening star was represented by his dog-headed skeletal psychopomp brother Xolotl. For 10 points, Hernan Cortes is not to be confused with which rival of Tezcatlipoca, an Aztec god usually represented as a feathered serpent?

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl [or Quetzalcohuatl; anti-prompt on "Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli" or "Ehecatl"]

Result: 728 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 31264

Question: One of these figures fathered Alcmaeon's wife Callirhoe and, according to Ovid, transformed five forgetful nymphs into the Echinades islands. Another of these figures fathered the Pheraean Orsilochus and fell in love with Arethousa. Another of them fathered Glaucia and the Cretan king Teucer and thrice attacked Achilles during the Trojan War. Their chief was a suitor for the hand of Deianeira who turned into a bull and had his horn twisted off by Heracles. One of these figures was the first immortal to assist Zeus during the Titanomachy and is the (*) deification of an entity on which gods swore unbreakable oaths. Their number includes the aforementioned Alpheus, Scamander, and Achelous, as well as Cocytus and Acheron. For 10 points, name these figures from Greek myth who represented certain geological features, the most famous of which is Styx.

ANSWER: river deities/gods/goddesses [or Potamoi]

Result: 729 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 31275

Question: In one story, this figure explains another character's ravenous appetite and burning eyes by claiming that that character hadn't slept or eaten for eight days. In one appearance, he snaps at the servant Eldir and kills the servant Fimafeng. The cord Vartari was used to sew this god's mouth shut after he lost a bet involving the sons of Ivaldi. One of his sons was turned into a wolf which then disemboweled his son Narfi, whose entrails were used to (*) bind him in a cave where his wife Sigyn protects him from dripping poison. He lost an eating contest to a similarly-named personification of fire while traveling with Thor and disguised himself as the giantess Thokk to interfere with the revival of Baldr, whose death he'd engineered. His children with the jotunn Angrboda include Hel, Fenrir, and Jormungandr. For 10 points, identify this colossal jerk, the Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki Laufeyarson [or Loptr]

Result: 730 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 31296

Question: One story claims that this god briefly blocked Parashurama's path to the Himalayas, resulting in Parashurama throwing his axe at him. The Mudgala Purana describes eight incarnations of this god, two of which have a huge protruding belly. A story in which he tied his burst-open belly with a snake is recalled by the eating of sweets called "modak" during the festival commemorating his birth, which also involves dumping lots of idols of him into the nearest body of water. He once (*) walked around his parents to craftily win a "race around the world" against his brother Skanda. His usual mount is a shrew or a mouse, he assisted Vyasa by transcribing the Mahabharata, and he is widely worshipped as the "remover of obstacles". For 10 points, identify this son of Parvati and Shiva, a Hindu god known for his elephant head.

ANSWER: Ganesha [or Vigneshvara; or Ganapati; or Vinayaka; or Pillaiyar; or like fifty other things]

Result: 731 | MUT | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 31318

Question: The Great Goddess of Teotihuacan was accompanied by a retinue of, and sometimes took the form of, these creatures. Minamoto no Raiko is nearly killed by either a beautiful woman or a monk which is revealed to be the Tsuchigumo, a tiger-striped demon with this animal form. One of these animals is the brother of the storm-monster Iya and the son of Inyan the rock, according to the Lakota. Another of these creatures receives all the (*) stories in the world after capturing four creatures for his father Nyame. The child of the dyer Idmon of Colophon was transformed into one of these creatures after being sprinkled with aconite, which happened after she hung herself after Athena beat her in a tapestry-weaving contest. For 10 points, identify the animal form of Iktomi, Anansi, and Arachne.

ANSWER: spiders [prompt on "arachnids" or equivalents]

Result: 732 | MUT | 2013 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 31405

Question: One god of this domain is accompanied by seven judges, seven messengers, and his bald uncle Myesyats. Another god of this domain counts among his enemies the immortal disembodied head Rahu. A god of this domain was assisted by the vizier Bunene, gave an axe called "Might of Heroes" and the bow of Anshan to Gilgamesh, and lived in a palace guarded by scorpion men. In another myth system, Dijun and Xihe were the parents of the three-legged birds responsible for this domain, (*) nine of which were killed by the archer Hou Yi. A temple that is torn down and rebuilt every twenty years at Ise is sacred to another deity of this domain, who once hid in a cave after a flayed pony was thrown into her hall by her brother Susano'o. For 10 points, identify this celestial domain associated with Dazhbog, Surya, Shamash, Amaterasu, and the Norse demigoddess Sól.

ANSWER: the Sun [accept Sol or solar deities/gods/goddesses before "Sol" is read"]

Result: 733 | MUT | 2013 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 31425

Question: A Thessalian contingent was led to the Trojan War by this figure's sons Podalirius and Machaon. His major cult center was at the Peloponnesian city of Epidaurus. This figure's mother was murdered alongside her lover Ischys while still pregnant with him, and his name derives from the fact that he was cut out of her body. He was placed in the sky as the constellation Ophiuchus after his death, an event which also prompted his father to revenge-kill the Cyclopes. His children with Epione include Aglaea, Hygieia, and (*) Panacea. This figure carried a staff that, unlike the caduceus, is entwined by only one serpent and, llike his father, this god bore the epithet "Paean". This son of Coronis and Apollo was killed either due to Hades's complaints or because he accepted money for resurrecting Glaucus or Hippolytus. For 10 points, name this Greek god of medicine and healing.

ANSWER: Asclepius [or Asklepios; or Aesculapius; accept "Paean" until it is read]

Result: 734 | MUT | 2013 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 31437

Question: Carlo Albacini made additions to a beardless sculpture of this figure that was found in Hadrian's Villa and is now held in the Getty Villa. That sculpture of this man is named for the first Marquess of Lansdowne. One artist depicted him with a foot perched on a horned skull in a bronze statue held in the Frick Collection and showed him grasping a screaming man around the waist and lifting him into the air in another sculpture. Perhaps the most famous sculptural depiction of this man shows him holding some fruit behind his back, was produced by Glycon for the Baths of Caracalla from an original by (*) Lysippos, and takes its name from its 16th-century owners, the Farnese family. Antonio Pollaiuolo's aforementioned depiction shows him killing Antaeus. For 10 points, identify this Greek hero, often sculpted holding a club and the skin of the Nemean lion.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 735 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 56893

Question: The Swiss folk hero Heinrich von Winkelried died from exposure to this substance. Dobrynya Nikitich is stuck in this substance for three days until he sticks his spear into the ground, a remnant of the myth that Mother Earth will not absorb this stuff because it's so vile. In Norse legend, a series of trenches were dug to store this substance by a hero who hid in a pit to kill its owner. A hero who bathed in this substance had a leaf covering his shoulder, leaving that shoulder vulnerable. After consuming this substance, that man killed Regin, having gained the ability to understand birds. For 10 points, name this substance which Sigurd consumed after he slew Fafnir, and which presumably flowed out of a wound inflicted by St. George.

ANSWER: dragon blood [or a serpent's blood; or a zmey's blood; or any other kind of dragon's blood; prompt on blood; prompt on bodily fluids; prompt on poison]

Result: 736 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 23 | Mythology | NoneID: 56915

Question: The narration of this event includes a tangential description of the washing of robes in the pools near the hot and cold wellsprings of the Scamander. During this event, one man claims that there can never be love between lambs and wolves in his rejection of a pact. At the beginning of this event, one participant is chased three times around the walls of his city until Athena impersonates Deiphobus. In the aftermath of this event, that participant is tied to a chariot and dragged to the funeral pyre of Patroclus. For 10 points, name this climactic event in the Iliad in which the greatest Trojan is slain by the best of the Achaeans.

ANSWER: the fight between Hector and Achilles [or obvious equivalents; prompt on the Trojan War until "chased" is read]

Result: 737 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 56925

Question: This god ruled over an age ending with a day-long downpour of fire that killed all mortals except those who transformed into birds. Mortals who died of leprosy and dropsy were not cremated, but buried with small pieces of wood in this god's honor. This god supervised four spirits who watched over the four corners of the universe and smashed open pot-like mountains at the proper time. His consort, who once destroyed the world with a giant flood, was named "She of the jade skirt." This god was honored in the Atlacahualo festival, in which his priests extracted hearts from children sacrificed to him. This god presided over both storms and restoring rain. For 10 points, name this Aztec god of water.

ANSWER: Tlaloc

Result: 738 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 13 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 56973

Question: This woman is saved from a spell after her husband threatens to hang a pregnant mouse in public. This woman is trapped after touching a golden bowl inside a castle, after which the castle disappears in a cloud of mist. This woman's attendants smear dog blood on her mouth to frame her for a crime; she then does penance by sitting near a horseblock. Originally betrothed to Gwawl, she is won after her first husband invents the game of Badger-in-the-Bag. This woman, who is first seen riding a white horse, may be syncretized with the goddess Epona. She was eventually reunited with her golden-haired son Pryderi, whose father was Pwyll. For 10 points, name this woman from Welsh mythology.

ANSWER: Rhiannon

Result: 739 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 15 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57009

Question: William Laughead wrote about this man and named one of his companions in a series of Red River Pamphlets, one of which claimed he was from Westwood, California. The earliest printed story about this man was published by James MacGillivray in the Detroit News-Tribune under the title "The Round River Drive." Stories about this man may have spread as early as the Papineau Rebellion. This man found a creature during the Winter of the Blue Snow for which he created five watering holes. This man's clerk, Johnny Inkslinger, invented bookkeeping and the fountain pen. This man has been credited with creating the Grand Canyon and the Great Lakes. For 10 points, name this figure from American folklore who worked as a lumberjack with Babe the Blue Ox.

ANSWER: Paul Bunyan

Result: 740 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 15 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57015

Question: This god once made the Fates drunk to get them to except his favorite mortal from death. According to Ovid, he allowed Cyparissus to transform into a cypress tree after that mortal accidentally killed a favorite stag. This god turned himself into a tortoise to seduce Dryope, then turned himself into a snake and raped her. Homer refers to this god by a mysterious epithet that may have to do with mice, "Smintheus." With Cyrene, he was the father of a beekeeping demigod, Aristaeus. Jealous of this god, the West Wind blew a discus off course so that it killed his male lover Hyacinthus. He gained a cult center after slaying the Python. For 10 points, name this Greek god of music and light.

ANSWER: Apollo [or Apollon]

Result: 741 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 16 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 57041

Question: According to the Homeric Hymns, Apollo appeared on a Cretan ship as a talking one of these creatures to get the priests for his oracle at Delphi. In a story recounted by Herodotus, these animals save a musician from Methymna who goes to Corinth to confront King Periander. Acoetes avoided being turned into one of these creatures for saving a young boy from rape. These animals saved the musician Arion in one myth, and in another, they were originally Tyrrhenian pirates who were transformed into this shape for mistreating Dionysus. For 10 points, name this marine mammal that serves as a messenger for Poseidon due to its intelligence.

ANSWER: a dolphin

Result: 742 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 17 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57056

Question: As a baby, this man was kidnapped by Telephus, who threatened to murder him if Achilles did not heal him. The Oracle at Delphi told him to go to the Crimea, where he teamed up with his half-brother Chryses to defeat King Thoas and take a statue of Artemis. This man kidnapped Menelaus' daughter Hermione along with his cousin and best of friends, Pylades. This man's mother had a dream in which she suckled a viper at her breast who turned out to be him. This man goes insane, but is acquitted of murder after Athena arranges the first murder trial on the Acropolis. For 10 points, name this prince who killed Aegisthus and Clytemnestra to avenge his father Agamemnon.

ANSWER: Orestes

Result: 743 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 18 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57089

Question: This character is seduced by the rhetoric of a character who assures him that "sleep after toil, port after stormy seas, ease after war, death after life does greatly please." After taking off his armor to have sex with a witch, this character is captured by the giant Orgoglio. The work in which he appears begins with a description of him "pricking on the plain" with two companions. After being rescued from a dungeon by Prince Arthur and being rejuvenated in the House of Holiness, he slays the dragon harassing the kingdom of Una's parents. For 10 points, name this protagonist of the first book of The Faerie Queene.

ANSWER: Redcrosse Knight

Result: 744 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 18 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57090

Question: In American and Irish folklore, an evil man named John of this profession becomes "Jack O'Lantern" after tricking the Devil and being denied entrance to hell. Another man of this profession gets hamstrung and forced to work for the king of Sweden, Nidud. Another figure with this profession loses his first wife to Kullervo, having earlier failed to win the Maiden of Pohjola through his gift of the Sampo. This trade is practiced in Finnish myth by Ilmarinen and, in many Germanic traditions, by Volund. Another god of this profession was raised by Thetis on Lemnos after Zeus threw him out of Mount Olympus. For 10 points, name this trade practiced by the Greek god Hephaestus.

ANSWER: blacksmith [prompt on craftsman]

Result: 745 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 19 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57107

Question: In Chinese myth, an animal of this color guards over autumn and the western quadrant of the sky. A book named for this color, from Rhyderch, provided source material for the Mabinogion. Except for their red ears, the hounds of Annwn are this color. Vortigern tried to build a castle where a dragon of this color defeated a red one, representing the Britons' defeat of the Saxons. A book claiming there was a pan-European matriarchal religion was titled for this kind of "goddess" and written by Robert Graves. Kalki will arrive riding a horse of this color, also the color of the bull with which Pasiphae fell in love. For 10 points, name this color of the sails unused by Theseus.

ANSWER: white

Result: 746 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 43333

Question: In Thai dramas of this event, Phra Lak exits before it is carried out by Thotsakan. The idea for this action came from a sharp-nailed woman with fish-shaped eyes whose nose had been cut off as punishment for seduction, named Surpanakha. Before this event, a demon skilled at imitating voices, Maricha, became a golden deer to serve as a distraction. A large bird whose wings were cut off trying to stop this event was the vulture-king Jatayu, Garuda's brother. This event's perpetrator disguised himself as a holy beggar in Dandaka forest. It occurred after Lakshmana ran off to find his brother during a fourteen-year exile, and incites a quest to Lanka to slay a ten-headed demon king. For 10 points, identify this event in which Ravana took possession of the wife of Rama.

ANSWER: abduction of Sita by Ravana [or abduction of Nang Sida; accept answers featuring ordinary-language synonyms such as kidnapping or capture for "abduction"; do not accept answers involving "rape" since Sita remains chaste]

Result: 747 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 20 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57142

Question: The skilled physician Eir is often theorized to be a form of, if not a companion of, this deity. In a euhemeristic story, this goddess once seduced a craftsman who tore down a gigantic statue of her husband. In another myth, one of this goddesses's attendants receives a golden ring whereas she herself receives a white linen robe. Another of her attendants rides the flying horse Hofvarpnir. In another story, this mistress of Fulla and Gna was shared between Vili and Ve during her husband's absence. A visitor to this goddess's hall of Fensalir manages to get her to reveal that she forgot to extract an oath from mistletoe, failing to secure complete invulnerability for her son. For 10 points, name this mother of Baldr, the wife of Odin.

ANSWER: Frigga

Result: 748 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 48010

Question: This monster is the namesake of Gyas' ship in the boat race from the fifth book of the Aeneid. The phrase "For Tinia" is inscribed on this creature's leg in a bronze Etruscan sculpture of it found near Arezzo. King Iobates dispatched a hero to kill this creature, which died after swallowing a lump of molten lead from a speartip. It was defeated with the help of a golden bridle obtained from the temple of Athena. This fire-breathing monster ravaged the land of Lycia. For 10 points, name this monster with a serpent for a tail, a goat on its back, and a lion as a head, which was slain by Bellerophon.

ANSWER: Chimera

Result: 749 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 55902

Question: One of these objects featured contrasting images of a city at peace and a city at war, surrounded by the stream of the Ocean. The "leaping priests," or the Salii, were put in charge of twelve of these objects--eleven fake, one real--after one of them fell from the sky during the reign of Numa Pompilius. The Sabines crushed Tarpeia to death with these objects. Seven ox-hides were used to create one belonging to Ajax. The one belonging to Aeneas depicts several scenes from Rome's history. A more famous one was made of goatskin and was used to kill Polydectes. That one, upon which Medusa's head was mounted, was lent by Athena to Perseus. For 10 points, name these kinds of protective objects in Greek mythology, including the Aegis.

ANSWER: shields

Result: 750 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 55942

Question: This man was said to have defeated the Hyanteans and Aonians upon reaching Boeotia. In one myth, this hero disguised himself as a shepherd and played music for Typhon, allowing him to retrieve the sinews of Zeus. This man was assisted by a set of powerful warriors called Spartoi. This man and his wife were transformed into snakes near the end of their lives as punishment for this man slaying a snake sacred to Ares. During this man's wedding, his wife was given a necklace that caused misfortune for its owners. This man, who married Harmonia, undertook his most famous action after being told by the oracle of Delphi to cease seeking his sister Europa. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who founded the city of Thebes.

ANSWER: Cadmus

Result: 751 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56134

Question: While questing for this object, a god was asked for the red rings on his fingers by its owner's greedy sister; that god won this object after his red eyes and ravenous hunger were attributed to eight sleepless nights in anticipation of sex. This object is used daily to revive animals whose names translate as "teeth-barer" and "teeth-grinder." It was once stolen by Thrym, prompting its owner to cross-dress in order to retrieve it. This object was created with a shorter handle than expected after Brokkr was bitten on the eyelid by a god who transformed himself into a fly. It will be inherited by its user's sons, Magni and Modi. This weapon will slay the Midgard Serpent at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this hammer of Thor.

ANSWER: Mjolnir [or Thor's hammer until mentioned]

Result: 752 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 56150

Question: This hero consolidated power by ambushing and killing his fifty cousins, the Pallantides. Cimon celebrated a military victory by bringing back the bones of this hero. After committing rape in a bed of asparagus, he fathered Melanippus on Perigune. This man lost part of his thigh after being ripped out of a chair by his relative, Heracles, who saved him from his ill-considered visit to the underworld with Pirithous. This man married Phaedra after abandoning a woman who had helped him out with a ball of string. For 10 points, name this Athenian hero who, with Ariadne's help, killed the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 753 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 56166

Question: This woman's son killed her uncle Perses in order to regain a throne. King Alcinous agreed to shelter this woman only if she was married, then convinced her to marry in the middle of the night. This woman had to leave Greece after her husband recognized a sword left behind in Troezen; thus, this wife of Aegeus failed to kill Theseus. This sister of Apsyrtus hypnotized Talos into removing a nail from his foot. She convinced Pelias' sons to cut up their father, and escaped in a chariot pulled by dragons after sending Glauce a poisoned dress. She also gave her husband an ointment before he sowed a field with dragons' teeth. For 10 points, name this enchantress, the wife of Jason.

ANSWER: Medea

Result: 754 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 56168

Question: Place name or people acceptable. The sailor Dymas lived in this place, where a deity went in disguise as Dymas's daughter. Samuel Butler believed that a woman from this place adopted the pseudonym Homer to write poetry. In this place, the singing of Demodocus brings a visitor to tears. A resident of this location inspired the character of Gertie MacDowell. Arete is the queen of this place, whose sailors were transformed with their ship into stone by an angry Poseidon. Alcinous's daughter, a princess of this island, comes across a nude man while doing laundry in Book VI of a Homeric epic. For 10 points, Nausicaa lives on what island, the last place Odysseus lands before returning home to Ithaca?

ANSWER: Phaeacia [or Skheria; or Phaeacians]

Result: 755 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 56207

Question: Han Xiang's production of an endless supply of this stuff convinced his uncle to let him study Daoism. In Celtic myth, this substance caused Midhir's lover Etain to be reborn a millenium into the future. The ancient Roman god of this substance was named Liber. After nearly raping his own mother, Lycurgus went on a campaign against this substance, which Circe used to turn Odysseus' men into pigs. This substance attracted many bloodthirsty centaurs to Pholus's cave. Homer wrote that the Aegean Sea was as dark as this substance, which Silenus may have liked a little too much. For 10 points, name this beverage whose Greek god was Dionysus.

ANSWER: wine

Result: 756 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 56229

Question: At this woman's wedding, a white hart ran through the hall, chased by sixty black hounds. She held a feast where she was accused of poisoning an apple actually planted by Pinel. This woman is the antagonist of a lay by Marie de France, Lanval. A hero who went to find this woman in the Land of Gorre had to cross over the Sword Bridge. This woman's father owned Camelerd, and was helped out when this woman's eventual husband killed King Rience's men. This daughter of Leodegrance was abducted by Meleagant and saved by a man who mistook Elaine of Corbenic for this woman. For 10 points, name this Queen of Camelot who carried on an affair with Lancelot despite being married to Arthur.

ANSWER: Guinevere

Result: 757 | NASAT | 2013 | Round: Round 1 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 32790

Question: On his way to accomplish this task, a man was captured and almost sacrificed by the Egyptian King Busiris. The man who accomplished it, who was not Menelaus, obtained information by capturing the Old Man of the Sea. On his way to do this, that man ran into a son of Poseidon who was amazingly strong if he remained in contact with the ground. This task was assigned after Eurystheus claimed slaying the Hydra and cleaning the Augean stables did not count. It may have involved the slaying of the dragon Ladon, but it also involved one man offering to hold up the heavens for a bit to convince Atlas to help him. For 10 points, name this eleventh of Heracles' labors, which involved him stealing immortality-granting fruit.

ANSWER: stealing the golden apples of the Hesperides

Result: 758 | NTSS | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42673

Question: One of this man's sons was devoured when the supply of human flesh he had been feeding his horses ran out. This man found his nephew's corpse carried to shore by a dolphin, and his twin sons were killed by their mother Tyro. He marked his cattle's hooves to prove that they had been stolen, and then raped the thief's daughter, Anticlea [an-TEE-clee-ah]. This man left the Underworld after his wife Merope [MEH-roh-pay] failed to perform proper funeral rites; earlier, he had narrowly escaped death by chaining up Thanatos. Name this king of Corinth who was condemned in Tartarus to eternally push a boulder up a hill.

ANSWER: Sisyphus

Result: 759 | NTSS | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42717

Question: Artemis was tricked into shooting an arrow at one of this deity's children. This deity and Apollo were forced to construct a wall for Laomedon around the city of Troy, and he seduced Demeter to father the immortal horse Arion. Out of anger towards Minos, this father of Orion caused Pasiphaë [puh-SIH-fuh-ee] to fall in love with a bull. Odysseus blinded this deity's son Polyphemus. This deity lost the patronage of Athens by a single vote and fathered the merman Triton with his wife Amphitrite [AM-fee-TRY-tee]. Horses were sometimes sacrificed to this god, who could create earthquakes. Name this trident-wielding Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon [accept Orion before "children"; do not accept "Neptune"]

Result: 760 | NTSS | 2013 | Round: 15 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42783

Question: This man raised the treacherous Midac [MIH-dak], who later imprisoned this man and his companions in a house of rowan trees. As a youth, he reclaimed his father's magical crane-skin bag and held a spear against his forehead to resist the sleep-inducing harp of Aillen [AH-len]. His two dogs refused to kill a deer that this man married after she regained her form as a woman named Sadb [SAHV]. This father of Oisin [oh-SHEEN] will awake from his slumber at the hour of greatest need, and he gained wisdom by burning his thumb as he cooked the Salmon of Knowledge. Name this woodland warrior from Irish mythology.

ANSWER: Fionn mac Cumhaill [FINN mak "COOL"] [accept Deimne [DAY-nee]]

Result: 761 | NTSS | 2013 | Round: 15 | Question: 57 | Mythology | NoneID: 42823

Question: This figure caused a single night to last over four billion years in order to dance with his love, and later married more than 16,000 disgraced virgins after using a discus to kill their captor. He squeezed the life out of his wet nurse's breasts, chased away the serpent Kaliya, and killed his uncle Kamsa prior to the Kurukshetra War. After lending his entire army to Duryodhana, he chose to drive the chariot of Arjuna, to whom he gave a series of orations recorded in the Bhagavad Gita. Name this blue-skinned figure who followed Rama as the eighth avatar of Vishnu.

ANSWER: Krishna [prompt on Vishnu before the end]

Result: 762 | NTSS | 2013 | Round: 15 | Question: 66 | Mythology | NoneID: 42832

Question: This deity incited an endless war in which dead soldiers were turned into stone and revived the next day in order to retrieve one of her possessions. This deity transformed one of her followers into a boar in order to uncover his lineage, and she cries tears of red gold whenever her husband is away. This owner of a cloak of falcon feathers slept with four dwarves over four nights to obtain the necklace Brisingamen, and was impersonated by Thor at a wedding feast. Name this Norse goddess of love and beauty, the twin sister of Frey.

ANSWER: Freyja [FRAY-yuh] [do not accept "Freyr" or "Frey"]

Result: 763 | NTSS | 2013 | Round: 16 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42853

Question: This deity blew the sun and moon into motion, and his rule over the world was ended after humans were transformed into monkeys and killed by a hurricane. He immolated himself after either seeing his enemy's face reflected in a mirror or drunkenly sleeping with his virgin sister. This deity and his brother Xolotl [SHOH-loh-tuhl] ground up bones to create a new race of humans, after which this rival of Tezcatlipoca [TEZ-kaht-lee-POH-kah] departed from the world on a raft of snakes. Name this feathered serpent from Aztec mythology.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl [KET-zahl-koh-AH-tuhl] [prompt on Ehecatl]

Result: 764 | NTSS | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42518

Question: This role could not be properly fulfilled by the Aztec deity Tezcatlipoca [TEZ-caht-lee-POH-kah] because Cipactli had eaten his foot. In Polynesian mythology, Maui [MAO-ee] responded to his mother Hina's complaints by attacking one of these gods, which in Norse mythology constantly flees from the wolf Skoll. The Shinto deity over this realm was harassed by her brother Susanoo [soo-SAH-noh-oh] into hiding in a cave, while this type of Egyptian deity is aided by Set in his nightly fights with the serpent Apep and became syncretized with Atum and Amun. Name this celestial body represented in Shinto mythology by Amaterasu [ah-mah-teh-rah-soo] and in Egyptian mythology by Ra.

ANSWER: sun or solar deities [accept similar answers mentioning an underlined term]

Result: 765 | NTSS | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42541

Question: The third section of Ovid's Heroides [heh-ROH-ih-dees] is a letter written to this character from Briseis [brih-SAY-is]. This man's disguise as a woman was foiled when he took up a spear in response to a false call to arms. In one account, he was ambushed and killed by the forces of Paris during a secret meeting with Polyxena. Ajax the Greater committed suicide after failing to win this man's armor. Following a quarrel with Agamemnon, he refused to fight until the death of his friend Patroclus, after which this man killed Hector. As an infant, his mother Thetis almost entirely submerged him in the River Styx. Name this Greek hero who was invulnerable everywhere except for his heel.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 766 | NTSS | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42563

Question: This man proved his parentage by retrieving a ring from the ocean floor. Castor and Pollux kidnapped his mother while this man was in the Underworld, from which he was rescued by being pulled out of the Chair of Forgetfulness. Rampaging horses caused his son Hippolytus to crash his chariot and die, and his mortal father committed suicide when this man forgot to change the sails on his ship. Dionysus courted one of his lovers, Ariadne [air-ee-AHD-nee], who was abandoned on an island after she lent this man a ball of string with which to navigate the Labyrinth. Name this king of Athens who slayed the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 767 | NTSS | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 42585

Question: This deity's gift of a perfect memory was inherited by his son Aethalides [AA-thuh-LEE-dees], and he aided the fight against Typhon by re-attaching Zeus's tendons. This deity rescued Ares from captivity in a bronze jar and put to sleep the 100 eyes of Hera's watchman Argus in order to slay it. On the day of his birth, he stole Apollo's cattle and used a tortoise shell to invent the lyre. He informed Perseus of the location of the Graeae [GRAY-ay] and possesses a staff called the caduceus [kuh-DOO-see-us]. Name this Greek messenger god who wears winged sandals.

ANSWER: Hermes [accept Mercury]

Result: 768 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 1.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 29478

Question: This fate befell Cyparissus after he accidentally killed a stag, and the Olympians do this to a lover of Hades named Leuce after her death. This happens to the daughter of King Cinyras while she is pregnant with her father's child Adonis. After Phaethon crashes the sun-chariot, this happens to his grieving sisters. This fate occurs to a couple who fail to catch a goose but act hospitably to Zeus and Hermes. This (*) transformation ends Ovid's tale of Baucis and Philemon. This also happened to a daughter of the river Peneus after a lead arrow made her run away from Apollo's pursuit. For 10 points, name this transformation which saved Daphne, but allowed Apollo to make a wreath from her new, immobile form.

ANSWER: transforming into a tree [or creating a tree to replace a person; accept transforming into a cypress tree, myrrh tree, white poplar tree, oak tree, linden tree, or bay laurel tree specifically]

Result: 769 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 45826

Question: This nation's fables include a sea slug which stayed silent instead of vowing its obedience. One deity from this country crushed a servant's bones for failing to bring back a delicious liver. A fisherman from this country was thrown three hundred years into the future after saving a turtle and stayed in an ocean palace where jellyfish are servants and two jewels control the tide. Another god from this nation set out eight bowls of (*) alcohol to win a battle, and was born when his father washed his nose. That god from this country obtained a grass-cutting blade after slaying an eight-headed serpent, and threw a flayed horse at his sister's loom. For 10 points, name this country whose water gods include the draconic Ryujin and Susano'o the storm kami.

ANSWER: Japan [or Nippon; or Nihon]

Result: 770 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 46399

Question: These animals' blood was dumped on late Roman priests of Cybele or Magna Mater in a baptism-like ritual. One of these creatures with distinctive white spots on its forehead and foreleg was slain by Cambyses II when he invaded Egypt; that one, later syncretized with Osiris, was called Apis and was sacrosanct in Memphis. In the Roman Empire, statues of this creature with a knife held to its neck were made by the cult of (*) Mithras, a solar deity who slew this animal. A white one named Nandi is the mount of Shiva; in Greek myth, a Cretan and Marathonian one fought Theseus and Heracles. For 10 points, name these male animals whose head appeared on the Minotaur.

ANSWER: bulls [or cattle; do not accept "cows"]

Result: 771 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 13 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 46560

Question: Some foreheads in this national myth system shone with a leaderly splendor called farr. It's not Norse, but this national mythos includes a primeval bull created alongside its first man. A hero from this mythology falls in a pit and dies with his horse after tearing the heart out of the White Demon. In this mythology, the Caesarian section is taught by a giant white bird called the (*) Simurgh, which helps Zal's wife bear a hero who completes seven labors and kills his own son Sohrab. Those national myths, including those of Rostam, were told by Ferdowsi in the Book of Kings, or Shahnameh. For 10 points, name this mythology of a now-Islamic country once ruled by shahs.

ANSWER: Persian mythology [or Iranian mythology; or Farsi mythology; accept Shahnameh until mentioned; accept Book of Kings until mentioned]

Result: 772 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 14 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 46591

Question: This figure is put to sleep after opening a box full of darkness. This figure was told by a talking tower to go to Taenarum, after which an eagle helped this figure get water from the River Styx. The two sisters of this mortal were both married to kings, but jumped off cliffs because of their shabby accommodations. In Apuleius's Latin novel The Golden Ass, a talking reed helps this figure gather (*) golden wool from vicious sheep, and ants help this mother of Voluptas sort a huge pile of grain. In her story, Greeks neglect Aphrodite to worship her instead, leading Zephyrus to bring her to a palace where her future husband only visited her in the dark. For 10 points, name this princess beloved by Eros, whose name means "soul."

ANSWER: Psyche

Result: 773 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 15 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 46662

Question: Tulsidas composed a 40-verse chalisa hymn to this deity, who was born after an offering of sacred pudding flew into the hands of his mother. Before one journey, Jambavan had to give a reminder of this deity's strength. This child of Anjana is technically a vanara in his most common form, just like Vali and a king he advises named Sugriva. This god got a healing (*) herb by changing size to lift a mountain. This god with a scarred chin is the son of Vayu. As a child, this god mistook the sun for a mango, and he later destroyed Ravana's fortress on Lanka as a fire burned on his tail. For 10 points, name this helper of Rama, a Hindu monkey god.

ANSWER: Hanuman

Result: 774 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 16 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 46690

Question: A creature spawned by this male figure's journeys eventually killed the Argonaut Mopsus. This figure defeated a maenad army in Mycenae, where he may have briefly killed Dionysus. His son Electryon was the father of Alcmene and inherited Tiryns. As a child, this man was raised on the isle of Seriphos by the fisherman Dictys. This man fulfilled a prophecy by accidentally (*) killing his grandfather Acrisius with a discus, and also killed Polydectes. Chrysaor was born from one victim of this hero, who received Cronus' sickle and a magical bag. This interrogator of the Gray Sisters used Hermes' winged sandals to save a woman who was chained in front of a sea monster in Ethiopia. For 10 points, name this son of Danae, who rescued Andromeda and slew Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 775 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 17 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 46703

Question: One king of this country had his horses' lips and tails cut out, then withstood an invasion using silent warriors revived from a cauldron. Three brother gods from this country are a goldsmith, carpenter, and blacksmith who work together. This country's immram genre of magic island voyages later starred Christian monks. A giant with one paralyzing eye was beaten here by a group including a silver-armed and a (*) "long-armed" god. A hero of this country betrayed a friend with a "love spot" on his head, met a deer that became his wife, and sired a bard who vanished for 300 years; that father of Ossian sleeps under this land until the hour of need, and burnt his thumb on the Salmon of Knowledge. For 10 points, name this isle protected by Finn MacCool.

ANSWER: Ireland [or Eire]

Result: 776 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 18 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 46925

Question: Amisodarus raised this mythical being, who was depicted in a bronze statue found at Arezzo made by Etruscans. In The Aeneid, the helmet of Turnus depicts this figure. This non-human met one foe after accusations of adultery with Stheneboea were written up in a letter by Proetus. A story about this creature is followed by an exchange of gold armor for bronze when Glaucus describes it to Diomedes in Book Six of the Iliad. Iobates ordered this creature's (*) death when it lived in Lycia. It suffocated on an arrow tipped with lead before its killer tried to fly to Olympus atop Pegasus. For 10 points, name this fire-breathing beast slain by Bellerophon, which had the heads of a snake, goat, and lion.

ANSWER: the Chimera

Result: 777 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 19 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 46947

Question: In Egyptian wall paintings, this color identified baboons or ibises as Thoth. Among the eight chakras, this color represents the Vishuddha chakra in the throat. One goddess with a body of this color bears five children after getting Thoth to take moonlight and extend the lunar year by five days, and causes darkness by coming close to her lover (*) Geb. Tefnut's daughter, the Egyptian goddess Nut, is this color with bright spots. The Halahala poison imparted this color upon being swallowed. An avatar of this color declares "Now I am become death, destroyer of worlds" while serving as Arjuna's charioteer in the Bhagavad-Gita. For 10 points, name this color of Shiva's throat, Krishna's skin, and Babe, Paul Bunyan's ox.

ANSWER: blue [or sky blue; or cyan]

Result: 778 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 2.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 29533

Question: One man helped cause this event by narrating about Eurypylus, who heard an oracle's demand for a single human sacrifice. The date of this event was foretold by a snake eating a bird�s nest. A fleet briefly sailed to Tenedos and back before this event, though Epeius stayed. The abandoned man Sinon was captured before this event, which is followed by nostos stories in the lost Cyclic poems. A sacred statue, the (*) Palladium, was stolen to aid this event, during which Neoptolemus killed a king. It occurred after snakes ate the doubtful Laocoon and included the tossing of baby Astyanax off a wall as well as the rape of Cassandra, who predicted it. For 10 points, name this bloody battle in which Priam died and soldiers unloaded from a wooden horse.

ANSWER: the fall of Troy [or the sack of Troy; or Ilioupersis; accept answers with Ilium or Ilion in place of �Troy;� accept answers involving the use of the Trojan Horse; prompt on "Trojan War"; prompt on �end of the Trojan War"]

Result: 779 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 20 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 47029

Question: These beings turned the children of Pieros into birds. A trio of these beings worshipped at Delphi were named Hypate, Nete, and Mese. One of these immortals had a child whom Zephyrus killed with a disk. The Aganippe and Hippocrene (*) fountains were sacred to these figures, as was the Corcyrean cave. Thamyris was blinded by these figures, who include a carrier of a globe and compass. These figures were born to a personification of memory, Mnemosyne, with Zeus; they include Melpomene and another whose son went to the underworld to save Eurydice. For 10 points, name these deities who include Urania, Clio, and Calliope, nine goddesses who presided over the arts.

ANSWER: the Muses [or Mousai; or Pierides]

Result: 780 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 21 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 47047

Question: This animal's head was often seen on Saint Christopher in medieval icons. The nymph Maira was turned into a constellation depicting this animal. Their heads appeared with dolphin flippers on the bodies of the metalworking Telkhines. Zeus threw Mount Sipylus on Tantalus after Tantalus said he didn't have a golden one of these creatures, which was stolen by Pandareus. To resolve a paradox, one of these creatures was turned to (*) stone while chasing the Teumessian fox; that one was a gift from Zeus to Europa named Laelaps. Scylla's waist is ringed by six heads of this animal. Another of these creatures was captured for Heracles' twelfth labor. For 10 points, name these creatures, who include the underworld-guarding, three-headed Cerberus.

ANSWER: dogs [or hellhounds]

Result: 781 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 22 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 47063

Question: This object emerged after cornmeal was stolen by a dog, according to the Cherokee. A "dark rift" in this place, which served the same function as rivers of blood, pus, and scorpions, allowed people to enter the Mayan underworld Xibalba. On the seventh day of the seventh month each year, a bridge of magpies emerges over this locale to let a cowherd from Chinese folklore see his weaving lover. Its (*) English name comes from a Greek story in which a bite awoke the sleeping Hera, who produced it as she tore the infant Heracles away from her breast. For 10 points, name this bright set of night sky objects, a galaxy containing the Earth.

ANSWER: the Milky Way galaxy

Result: 782 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 23 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 47102

Question: This female figure ate an uncontaminated head of lettuce which caused the conception of a child. A large pillar stands near the lygos tree where this figure was allegedly born. In Book II of the Metamorphoses, this figure's Roman version asks the Ocean to help tear down a constellation. This user of the Canathus well, born on Samos, stages a deceptive seduction in a golden cloud atop Mount (*) Ida during the Trojan War, and had the epithet "bopis," meaning "cow-eyed." This goddess created a cloud to divert Ixion's attempted rape, sent a gadfly to torment the ex-human cow Io, and put the slain watchman Argus's thousand eyes on her sacred bird, the peacock. For 10 points, name this mother of Hebe, goddess of childbirth, and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera [accept Juno]

Result: 783 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 24 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 47113

Question: In Greek cities, the Prytaneum was sacred to this type of god; so was a three-story atrium between the Roman Regia and the Palatine Hill. A deity of this type was saved while sleeping alongside the maiden Lotis by the braying of Silenus's donkey, and made an oath by Zeus's head. The first deity invoked in any Greek sacrifice was this kind of deity. Roman families offered meat to the Lares affiliated with this realm. The last child to be (*) vomited up by Cronus, and the first to be swallowed, governed this domain; that goddess refused Poseidon and Apollo, had devotees who served for thirty years including Rhea Silvia, and resigned her seat on Olympus for Dionysus. For 10 points, name this familial area protected by Hestia and venerated by the Vestal Virgins.

ANSWER: goddesses of the hearth [or of the fireplace; or of the kitchen; or of the furnace; or of the oven; or of the sacred fire; accept any answer indicating a place in one's house where fire is produced; prompt on "the home" or "the house"; prompt on fire]

Result: 784 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 25 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 47141

Question: One king of this place was deposed by the sons of Agrius. The founder of this city had a daughter, Epicaste, who married her cousin Agenor. The namesake and founder of this place was the brother of Pleuron. One prince of this place who fled to Argos, named Tydeus, was Diomedes's father. A king of this place, with a name meaning "wine-man," ruled while a prince of this city killed his uncles (*) Toxeus and Plexippus. Its queen, Althea, threw a magical log into a fire to kill its greatest hero. After its king Oeneus forgot to make a sacrifice to Artemis, he called in Peleus, Nestor, and several other heroes to stop a rampaging beast. For 10 points, name this Greek city, outside of which Atalanta and Meleager led a hunt for its namesake boar.

ANSWER: Calydon [prompt on Aetolia; do not accept "Calydonia"]

Result: 785 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 3.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 29559

Question: This deity was raised by Buto after being born on the isle of Chemmis. This deity's mother was decapitated for accidentally harpooning this deity underwater. The Ennead sought to crown this god before a contest that lasted eighty years. This god's Behdety aspect was the first god for whom the symbol of a winged disk was carved. This god's sons guarded each cardinal direction. Like Ra, this god had an aspect ruling the horizon called (*) Herakhty. This father of the canopic jars raced in a painted wooden boat as his foe's stone boat sank. The wadjet symbol, sun, and moon were seen as this god's stolen eyes, and he fought an evil god of the desert. For 10 points, name this son of Isis who defeated Set to avenge his father Osiris, a falcon-headed god.

ANSWER: Horus [or Harsiesis; or Heru-ur; or Har-Wer; or Hor; or Harpocrates]

Result: 786 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 29742

Question: Six of these sites on a road around the Saronic gulf to Athens were guarded by Periphetes and other bandits who attacked Theseus. Xenophon claimed to see one of these on the Acherusian peninsula. In 2013, archaeologists at a temple in Hierapolis, Turkey, discovered a purported one that has high carbon dioxide levels. The Eleusinian mysteries helped Heracles discover one on Cape Taenarum, to which he carried a honey (*) cake. Another of these locales, a body of water which killed birds flying overhead, was Italy's Lake Avernus. At the Cumaean Sibyl's request, Aeneas acquires a golden bough to pass through one of these locations and see his father. For 10 points, name these places which connect the realms of the living and the dead.

ANSWER: entrances to the underworld [accept caves until "water" is read; accept gates, doors, portals, exits, etc. in place of "entrances"; accept Hades, Tartarus, Orcus, Dis, or hell in place of "underworld"; prompt on partial answers]

Result: 787 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 5.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 30715

Question: This figure exchanges insults with a boatman with a name meaning "Grey-beard" who refuses to ferry. One member of this deity's retinue is in atonement for scraping the marrow out of a thighbone, and the sorceress Groa ran off while healing this son of Fyorgin. This god lifted and brought back a huge brewing-kettle for Aegir. A piece of (*) whetstone was stuck in his head after he got stuck under the corpse of Hrungnir. This employer of the servants Roskva and Thialfi was once at sea with Hymir, who cut his fishing line, and waited until sunlight so the dwarf Alvis would turn to stone. He once disguised himself as a bride and flew in his goat-driven chariot to reclaim a prized weapon. For 10 points, name this Norse god whose use of Mjolnir causes thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [or Donar; or Thunor]

Result: 788 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 45452

Question: One of these objects has a wolf hair tied to it as a secret message from Gudrun. Another one was created along with a boar and a hammer by Brokk and Eitri; Hermod received that example of these objects from Baldur in Hel after it was placed on Baldur's funeral pyre. One of these objects named for its owner (*) Andvari was taken by Loki. Odin had one of these which activated every ninth night to make eight copies of itself. A cursed Norse one was taken from the dragon Fafnir and changed hands inside a ring of fire when Brynhild got it from Sigurd. For 10 points, name these objects which include Draupnir, a type of jewelry that caused the downfall of a Nibelung.

ANSWER: rings [or arm rings; accept armbands]

Result: 789 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 45458

Question: This character is at one point punished by being forced to wear the head of a woman he had decapitated. One of this character's sons is known as "Le Bel Inconnu", or "The Fair Unknown". This man's power grows stronger in the morning and weaker in the afternoon. In one work, this character wears a shield emblazoned with a pentangle and goes to the Chapel Perilous after accepting a (*) magic girdle. This son of Lot and brother of Mordred loses an epic battle with Lancelot at the end of Le Morte d'Arthur. In a different work, he resists seduction by Sir Bercilak's wife, but is nicked by the final blow in a beheading contest with the title figure. For 10 points, name this nephew of King Arthur who has a confrontation with the Green Knight.

ANSWER: Sir Gawain [or Gwalchmei; or Gualguanus; or Gauvain]

Result: 790 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 45485

Question: A scholar from this place published the Semiramis legend in his Bibliotheca historia. Arethusa became a fountain on Ortygia, a neighbor islet to this home of Diodorus. Acestes lives in its town of Eryx, where he shoots an arrow that catches fire, and frenzied women burn a fleet of ships that previously picked up Achaemenides here. Galatea's lover Acis was crushed by a boulder in this place. The giant Enceladus was buried under its (*) tallest peak, where Virgil located Polyphemus. Chains keep Typhon under this landmass, the end goal of Icarus's failed flight. In the water to its northeast, ships tried to avoid the churning Charybdis and six-headed Scylla. For 10 points, name this island where Hephaestus channeled the fires of Mount Etna.

ANSWER: Sicily [or Sicilia]

Result: 791 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 45746

Question: One of this figure's Homeric hymns is the shortest, at three lines long. This deity's followers commemorated the jokes told by Iambe and Baubo by drinking kykeon, a hallucinogenic beverage. This deity put Bootes into the sky, used a fireplace and ambrosia to try and make a baby immortal, and was the oldest figure prayed to at the Thesmophoria and the (*) Eleusinian mysteries. This anointer of Demophon bore the wealth god Plutus and lent a winged chariot to Triptolemus, whom she instructed. She let mankind suffer a yearlong famine, and then taught humans to plow, while searching for a daughter who resurfaces for half the year. For 10 points, name this mother of Persephone, a goddess of farming and grain.

ANSWER: Demeter [or Ceres]

Result: 792 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 24 | Mythology | NoneID: 45755

Question: This figure kills 150 women by destroying a house after failing to save the winner of a urination contest. This man was forbidden to marry one woman after sucking the stone out of a swan's slingshot wound, and he was separated from the fairy Fand by the magic cloak of a sea god, which ended the jealousy of his wife Emer. This figure tied himself to a stone to (*) fight to his death, after which a raven landed on him. This man was taught by the warrior woman Scathach and spurned the triune war goddess Morrigan. This member of the Red Branch Knights wielded the seven-tipped spear Gae Bolg and went into a killing frenzy to defeat Queen Medb's cattle raid. For 10 points, name this hero of the Ulster cycle.

ANSWER: Cu Chulainn [(koo-HULL-en); accept Setanta]

Result: 793 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 45757

Question: This man threw his own ring into the sea to challenge the paternity of a visiting hero. One of this man's children drowned in a honey barrel until revived by Polyidus, and another son of this man was murdered after winning another city's athletic games. This father of Androgeus won a war against Megara when the purple lock was cut from his foe Nisus's head. While wandering, he posed a challenge involving a spiral seashell and an (*) ant before the daughters of Cocalus overheated his bath to kill him. With his brother Rhadamanthys and Aeacus, this ruler became a judge of the dead. His wife Pasiphae obsessed over a white bull. For 10 points, name this captor of the engineer Daedalus, a cruel king of Crete who oversaw the building of the Labyrinth.

ANSWER: Minos

Result: 794 | PACE NSC | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 23 | Mythology | NoneID: 45778

Question: This male's lifelong home was stacked on Mount Ossa by the Aloadae, and he returned a sword stolen by Acastus. A daughter of this figure, who fled to avoid telling him about her pregnancy and became a horse, was Melanippe. This son of Philyra was killed because Pholus opened a jar of wine, and he gave the gift of an ashen spear at the wedding of Thetis and Peleus. This resident of Mount Pelion offered to take (*) Prometheus' place after he was shot with a poisonous arrow by Heracles. Uniquely among his species, he was not a descendant of Ixion. This son of Cronus introduced medicine to Asclepius before teaching Peleus, Jason, and Achilles. For 10 points, name this mentor of many Greek heroes, a wise centaur.

ANSWER: Chiron

Result: 795 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 38942

Question: One of this man's children restored the walls of Megara after killing the Cythaeronion lion so that he could marry Euachme. This man won a contest against a figure who had affixed the previous losers' severed heads to the columns of his palace. The constellation Auriga was created after this man pushed another off of a cliff; that charioteer had previously helped this man win a race against Oenomaus and was named (*) Myrtilus. This man's children included two brothers who agreed to transfer a kingdom when the sun moved

ANSWER: Pelops

Result: 796 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 39852

Question: In Hesiod's Theogony, this figure is the mother of Latinus. In the Apollonius of Rhodes's Argonautica, this figure comforts her niece Medea. In Ovid's Metamorphoses, this figure is defeated by Eurylochus. Some of this figure's jealous fits resulted in the a King of Latium being turned into a bird and the love interest of Glaucus being turned into a monster. In one story, after this figure's son kills her former lover, she marries that former lover's son; that work is the (*) Telegony. This figure tells one hero how to travel to the underworld and to speak with Tiresias about how to overturn one of Poseidon's curses. Hermes travelled to Aiaia to deliver moly to a hero who would proceed to sleep with this figure for a year. For 10 points, name this enchantress who turns Odysseus's men into pigs.

ANSWER: Circe [or Kirke]

Result: 797 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 39858

Question: This figure once destroyed the fields of Jahnu, leading Jahnu to swallow this figure and eventually release her from his ears. One of this figure's epithets reflects the fact that she can traverse all three worlds. This figure descended to earth after the sage Kapila burned the sixty thousand children of Sagara to death, and she helped them ascend to heaven. In one story, this figure killed seven of her children until her husband questioned her actions with the eighth; that eighth child was Bhishima, who was the son of (*) Shantanu. During her descent to earth, she landed on Shiva's hair, which he knotted in order to trap her and attenuate the flow of her water to the earth. For 10 points, name this personification of a sacred river in Hindu mythology.

ANSWER: Ganga [accept the Ganges]

Result: 798 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 12 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 39948

Question: One of this god's daughters married the personification of the Hydaspes River and was named Astris, and this god was the father of Bisalte, a son of Gaia. Among this god's daughters are one that carries a copper staff allowing her to control a group of animals. After this deity, the father of Phaethusa and Lampetia, was shot with an arrow, he loaned his (*) golden cup to Heracles. Odysseus' men stole the cattle belonging to this deity, and one group of this deity's daughters turned into weeping poplar trees after their brother fell into the Eriadnos river. After swearing an oath on the River Styx, this man was forced to allow a son of Clymene to use his chariot, with predictably negative consequences; that son was Phaethon. For 10 points, name this sun god of Greek mythology.

ANSWER: Helios

Result: 799 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 14 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 39983

Question: One person who helped stop this event was a one-eyed ox-eared giant who was executed for being late to a party celebrating its end. One person appointed to stop this event was tested by being wedded to two spoiled princesses whom he nonetheless convinced to live like commoners. One person was appointed on the advice of the Four Mountains and tried to use a self-replicating substance stolen from the Supreme Divinity to stop it; that figure was executed on Feather Mountain for failing. The figure who managed to stop this event was aided by (*) a black turtle and a yellow dragon, and worked for thirteen years straight. After this event, Fengyi martyred himself and became the god He Bo. This event was stopped by Yu the Great using a series of canals. For 10 points, name this climactic natural disaster from Chinese mythology in which the Yellow River overflowed.

ANSWER: the Chinese Great Flood [accept reasonable equivalents]

Result: 800 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 38945

Question: Pausanias claims that one member of this profession, an Euboean son of Crius, is the source of an alternative tradition for the name of Pythos. In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter, Demeter pretends to be Dosos, a person wronged by people in this profession. According to Apollodorus, a mistaken belief that Catreus was one of these people led his son Althaemenes to unknowingly slay him. Its not swineherding, but Eumaeus was in Sidon when these people took him to (*) Ithaca. One person demanded the right to sing one last song from some of these people and ended up being rescued from them by the dolphins that he attracted; that man was Arion. Dionysus turned some Tyrrhenian people in this profession into dolphins after using vines to fill up their boat. For 10 points, name these people who often appear in children's stories making their captives walk the plank.

ANSWER: pirates [prompt on slavers, raiders, freebooters, robbers and equivalents]

Result: 801 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 39024

Question: A popular Taoist legend has Xu Xian marry a woman who was originally a white one of these creatures. A minister of Gong Gong was one of these creatures named Xiangliu, who was killed by Yu the Great. While visiting Mount Black Wind, Sun Wukong kills the White-Robed Scholar, who took this form. The creator gods Fu Xi and Nu Gua were often depicted as half human, half this creature. One of these creatures was defeated with the help of a woman turned into a comb and a series of doors hiding (*) vats of wine; that example of these creatures had eight heads, was the source of the sword Kusanagi, was named Orochi, and was killed by Susanoo. For 10 points, name these creatures, who in other Asian mythologies make up the animal half of a Naga.

ANSWER: snakes [or serpents or dragon]

Result: 802 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 39159

Question: This object is said to be home to more serpents than any fool can imagine, including "the one ruling from the ditch" and "the winding one." This thing is listed first among objects that are the noblest of their kind. This object is supported by three wells, including a freezing one that is the source of 26 different rivers. Four (*) stags live on this object, which shakes and groans immediately after one god converses with a severed head in one event. A squirrel runs back and forth between a dragon and an eagle living on this object in order to carry mean messages, and this object is gnawed upon by a serpent living in the wastes of Nastrond named Nidhogg. In order to obtain the runes, one god used his spear to hang himself from this object for nine days; that god is Odin. For 10 points, name this object that holds up the nine worlds in Norse Mythology, which is a gigantic ash tree.

ANSWER: Yggdrasil

Result: 803 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 39385

Question: Besides being responsible for maize and dancing, the Aztec god Ixtilton was in charge of this domain. Cit-Bolon-Tum is a god of this domain in Mayan mythology. Another god of this domain attacked his son Miach four times for aiding King Nuada; that Celtic god is Dia'necht. Iron Crutch Li of the Eight Immortals had powers associated with gods of this domain when he let people drink from his gourd. A Greek god of this domain had a huge (*) sanctuary at Epidaurus and a son called Machaon. That Greek god of this domain was the son of Koronis and Apollo and was killed by Zeus's thunderbolt since his skill had grown so powerful that he was depopulating the underworld. For 10 points, name this domain of gods such as Asclepius, who was helpful in avoiding sickness and death.

ANSWER: Healing [or medicine; or health; or surgery; or doctors; or surgeons]

Result: 804 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 39497

Question: A humanoid monster that resembles this animal in the mythology of the Philippines is the Tikbalang. In Korean mythology, the Chollima is one of these animals. In Chinese mythology, the third son of the Dragon King of the West Sea is best known for taking a white-colored form of this animal and is called the Bailongma. Some of these animals owned by Rhesus are stolen in the (*) Doloneia. Peleus and Thetis got two talking examples of these animals at their wedding. The Iliad describes many heroes, but most notably Hector, as a "breaker" of these animals that include Balius and Xanthus. In a story from Norse myth, a ploy to delay some construction work at Asgard leads to Loki giving birth to one of these animals. For 10 points, name these this species that includes Odin's eight-legged Sleipnir and Bellerophon's winged Pegasus.

ANSWER: horses [or Equus Ferus Caballus; or ma before "Chollima"]

Result: 805 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 39719

Question: In Hinduism, the Vaitarna usually contains this substance, and a demon partly named for this substance was the companion of Sumbha and Nishumbha. In the Kalevala, this substance appearing on a comb foretold the death of Lemminkainen. The demon Raktavija used this substance to self-replicate, and in Norse myth it was mixed with ashes and honey to form the (*) Mead of Poetry. The giant Talos and the Olympian gods had ichor instead of this substance. A shirt covered with poison and this substance was given by Deianeira to Heracles, resulting in his death; that shirt had been tainted by the centaur Nessus. For 10 points, name this substance, with is required by vampires for sustenance.

ANSWER: blood

Result: 806 | Penn Bowl | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 39813

Question: In Greek mythology, the lover of Smilax was turned into one of these things. In Japanese mythology, the reason that humans have short lifespans is because Ninigi married the princess of these things, rather than the princess of rocks. In Aztec mythology, a goddess associated with these things was followed by a retinue of birds and butterflies, and was once (*) kidnapped by Tezcatlipoca. Kama's arrows were tipped with these things, and the Aztec gods Xochipilli and Xochiquetzal were associated with them. After being gored to death, Adonis' blood fell to the ground and created one of these things, as did a boy loved by Apollo and Zephyrus who was struck by a discus. For 10 points, name this type of plant associated with Hyacinthus.

ANSWER: flowers [prompt on "plants", accept more specific answers]

Result: 807 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 49287

Question: A nymph raped by this god had her wish granted to become a male warrior, and he fathered twins while disguised as Enipeus. Alongside his nephew, this god helped build the walls of Troy. He fathered a horse able to speak with his sister while in the form of a stallion. Erechtheus was the emissary of this god, who slept with Aethra on the same night as Aegeus and may have fathered Theseus. This husband of Amphitrite cursed Odysseus's voyage home after Odysseus blinded his son Polyphemus. For 10 points, name this Greek god of seas and earthquakes who wields a trident.

ANSWER: Poseidon [accept Neptune before "Enipeus"]

Result: 808 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 49464

Question: This mythological figure was upset by a god who threw a garland of flowers to the floor, after which it took 1000 years before she would emerge from the churning Kshirsagar along with the moon, her brother. One of her secondary manifestations is commonly depicted with two elephants; there are eight such manifestations. Her followers are wary of the owl, this four-handed goddess's vehicle, which symbolizes attachment to material wealth. She is usually depicted sitting on and holding a lotus, symbolizing fertility. She has manifested herself as a human ten times, including as Radha. For 10 points, name this Hindu goddess, the consort of Vishnu and goddess of wealth and prosperity.

ANSWER: Lakshmi [or Mahalakshmi; or Shri]

Result: 809 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 11 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 49500

Question: Nüwa, who in Chinese myths created the first humans and filled a void in the heavens, had the body of one of these creatures. One of these who incubated the egg of the world was named Ophion, and they also make up the skirt of Coatlicue. Vishnu slept on another one of these creatures, Ananta, and Tiresias became a woman after interfering with two mating ones. Laocoon and his sons were killed by two of these from the sea, and an Ouroboros was one that ate its own tail. For 10 points, name these legless creatures, including one which was killed by Apollo at Delphi, named Python.

ANSWER: snakes [accept serpents or clear equivalents]

Result: 810 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 13 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 49523

Question: His wife Lucy wore a blue dress and told him, "I'll be true to you" after he died. Another "little woman" this man had was called Polly Ann, and performed his job "just like a man" when he was sick. He was born in the 1840s as a slave, but later worked on the C&O Railroad. He raced Mr. Peabody's machine at Big Bend Mountain, moving fourteen feet into the mountain while the machine only moved nine. This man was "born with a hammer in his hand," and told his captain that "this hammer'll be the death of me". For 10 points, name this "steel-drivin' man", a six-foot-tall railroad worker who raced a steam hammer and died in the process from overexertion.

ANSWER: John Henry [prompt on partial]

Result: 811 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 14 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 49556

Question: He and his father were once rulers of Sweden after they left their original people as part of a truce. He killed Beli with an antler after giving his footservant Skirnir his sword, so that Skirnir would woo this god's eventual wife for him, whom he married nine days later. He will be killed by Surtr at Ragnarok. Alfheim was given to this god who rode the boar Gullinbursti, whose mane lights the way for its owner. He may have committed incest like his father, but this god was married to the giantess Gerdr. He owned the ship Skidbladnir and his sword could fight on his own. For 10 points, name this fertility god, a Vanir, son of Njord and brother of Freya.

ANSWER: Freyr [accept Yngvi]

Result: 812 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 49301

Question: This son of Adhan and an incubus entered Rome as a large stag with a white foot. He was born with the ability to speak in all tongues, and once prophesied that a tower could not be built because two dragons kept tearing it down. This figure died in a stone tower in which two lovers had spent their last night when Nimue, the Lady of the Lake, trapped him inside. He helped Uther enter Tintagel ("tin-TAH-jel") and father the future king of England on Igraine. This figure experienced time backwards, mentored Arthur Pendragon, and conjured the Sword in the Stone. For 10 points, name this wizard from Arthurian mythology.

ANSWER: Merlin

Result: 813 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 49329

Question: Perun throws lightning bolts at his enemy Veles, who lives at the bottom of one of these entities. Mesoamerican ones represent either the Milky Way or the four directions and were portrayed as ceiba ones. Mimameidr ("MEE-ma-MAY-dur") and Laeradr ("LAY-er-AY-dur"), where the goat Heidrun grazes, are identified with one of these that connected the various worlds, like Mesoamerican ones. Often near the bottom of one of these is an underworld, but one had three wells and Jotunheim by its roots. For 10 points, name these arboreal entities supporting or connecting the realms of the gods with our world, the most famous being Yggdrasil.

ANSWER: World Tree [prompt on "tree"]

Result: 814 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 49343

Question: Two sisters from this city were turned into a swallow and a nightingale. One of those sisters had her tongue cut off and wove a tapestry to tell of her rape by Tereus. Another figure from this city received a casket from a Thracian woman who transformed into an almond tree, Phyllis. In addition to Procne, Philomela, and Demophon, this city is also home to a figure who buried his sandals, shield, and sword under a rock for his son to recover. Kings of this city include Aegeus and the lover of Ariadne and slayer of the Minotaur, Theseus. For 10 points, name this city that rejected a saltwater spring from Poseidon in favor of an olive tree from its namesake goddess of wisdom.

ANSWER: Athens

Result: 815 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 49356

Question: This figure was deceived by his brother into abdicating the throne of Tollan, and in another myth, he struck down that brother, who proceeded to destroy mankind. In some myths, a crocodilian goddess gave birth to him while still a virgin, but in most versions of his birth, Ometeotl was his parent. He helped to kill Cipactli and created the earth, but did not lose a foot like Tezcatlipoca did. His brother was Xolotl, the god of the dead. This god was depicted as very colorful, and the world's largest pyramid dedicated to his worship. For 10 points, name this Aztec patron of knowledge and god of the wind, whose name means "feathered serpent".

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 816 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 49365

Question: A Roman statue that may depict this figure, a replica of a Lysippos bronze, portrays him hunched over while fastening his right sandal. In another sculpture of this figure, he points skywards with his right hand while he balances on his left foot, stepping on a column of air blown from Zephyr. That bronze is by Giambologna. A marble of this figure nude is missing his right arm, while a cloak is draped over his left arm which cradles the infant Dionysus in a work by Praxiteles. For 10 points, name this god often depicted with a winged hat, winged ankles and a staff with two snakes intertwined around it, the caduceus.

ANSWER: Hermes [or Mercury]

Result: 817 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 49390

Question: A drunk Hrungnir wants to steal this entity but is killed by Thor in a duel. Eikthyrni ("Eyk-THEER-knee") stands upon this entity, and from his antlers drip water that forms Hvergelmir. The tree Glasir stands before it, and people eat Saehrimnir under a ceiling thatched with golden shields in this place. Inside, Bilskirnir stands in the hall of Thor, who is the son of this place's owner. The Einherjar, who will drink and spar until Ragnarok when they will fight alongside the gods, are brought to this place by valkyries. For 10 points, name this hall from where Odin rules, located in Asgard.

ANSWER: Valhalla

Result: 818 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 49415

Question: The Hyksos worshiped this figure because he was the patron deity of foreigners. He once raced his archenemy but sank to the bottom of a river in a boat made of stone. This deity stood at the head of Ra's boat with Sekhmet, defending against Apophis. He was born when Thoth stole the moon's light, and he was the brother and husband of Nephthys. A falcon-headed god avenged his father, the husband of Isis, after this god killed and chopped him into fourteen pieces. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of storms and chaos who killed his brother Osiris but failed to usurp Horus's throne.

ANSWER: Seth

Result: 819 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 49433

Question: After the husband of this goddess killed the goddess of sustenance, she denounced him as evil. Her father banished her brother from heaven twice, and the two were eventually reconciled when he presented her with a sword. That brother threw a dead pony at the loom of this goddess, who was coaxed out of hiding after being blinded by her reflection in the mirror Yata no Kagami. This goddess gave the Iwata along with the Yasanaki gem and the Kusanagi to her grandson, the first emperor of Japan, and Tsukiyomi was her brother. For 10 points, name this kami of the sun, who was born out of Izanagi's left eye.

ANSWER: Amaterasu

Result: 820 | Prison Bowl | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 49453

Question: This man's mortal mother may have eaten his heart, and he carried a thyrsus tipped with a pinecone from which honey dripped, perhaps given to him by the Titans. He grew up with the nymphs of Nysa, and returned to Greece after Rhea cured him of his madness. This "twice-born" god had Lycurgus murder his son with an axe when Lycurgus tried to capture the Maenads. Aceotes escaped being turned into a dolphin when his fellow sailors tried to bind this god, whose mother was incinerated after viewing Zeus as proof of his godhood. This son of Demeter or Semele is followed by the satyrs. For 10 points, name this Greek god of wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus [accept Bacchus before "Nysa"]

Result: 821 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 54915

Question: A golden eagle with tin in its mouth sits on a black marble throne in this location, which "never storms disturb, rains drench, or snow invades." Gates made of clouds allow passage into this home of Hebe [HEE-bee] and Ganymede [GAA-nee-meed], who serve (*) nectar and ambrosia here. Hestia surrendered her seat to Dionysus in this legendary place, which is ruled over by Zeus. For 10 points, name this mountain home of the Greek gods.

ANSWER: Mount Olympus (accept throne of Zeus before "throne" is read; accept Zeus before "this location" is read)

Result: 822 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 55220

Question: This deity is sometimes identified with the crocodile god Khenty-khety, and with the blind Mekhenty-er-irty because of a struggle with his uncle. This god's severed hands were retrieved by Sobek's fish trap, and this figure painted a (*) wooden boat to look like stone in a race against Set. His left eye represented the moon, and is symbolized by the wadjet. For 10 points, name this falcon-headed Egyptian god, the son of Osiris.

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 823 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 54920

Question: Humans were the "cattle of" one god of this domain, who used red-dyed beer to calm Sekhmet in her rage against mankind. A god of this type was associated with the disk, Aten, and battled the serpent Apep in the underworld. Worshipped at (*) Thebes, this type of god traveled across the sky each day in a great boat. For 10 points, Amun and Ra were what kind of ancient Egyptian deity, who represented Earth's star?

ANSWER: ancient Egyptian sun gods (accept "deity" or logical equivalents for "god"; accept Ra or cattle of Ra before "domain" is read; do not accept "sun goddess")

Result: 824 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 54956

Question: Heidhrún ["HIDE"-hroon] stands on top of this place and produces mead for this building's residents, who are woken daily by Gullinkambi [GOO-lihn-kahm-bee]. This building is contrasted with Fólkvangr [FOHL-k-vahn-gurr], and a boar is slaughtered every day to feed the (*) Einherjar [INE-"hair"-yahr], who live here. This building's rafters are spears and its ceiling is made of shields. The Valkyries carry half of the heroes slain in battle to, for 10 points, what mythological mead hall ruled over by Odin?

ANSWER: Valhalla (accept Valhöll)

Result: 825 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 4 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 54974

Question: In Norse mythology, this phenomenon is controlled by an eagle-shaped giant named Hraesvelg [hRAYS-velg]. A Greek god of this phenomenon abducted the nymph Chloris. Hoping to find treasure, Odysseus's crew (*) opened a bag containing this phenomenon. It is governed by Aeolus [ay-oh-luhs] in Greek mythology, who presides over Boreas [boh-ree-as] and Zephyrus [zeh-fee-ruhs], the Northern and Western type of this. For 10 points, name this weather phenomenon that propels ships with sails.

ANSWER: winds

Result: 826 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 54998

Question: This figure is known as the "source of the Eumenides," though she is more commonly called Kore [KOH-ray], the maiden. This subject of the Eleusinian Mysteries [ell-yoo-zih-nee-an Mysteries] raised Adonis, and was kidnapped from the plains of Ennis. Her symbol is the (*) wheat sheaf, since the time she spends with Demeter causes plants to grow. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess, who became the Queen of the Underworld when she ate some pomegranate seeds.

ANSWER: Persephone

Result: 827 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 6 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 55137

Question: This figure's son, Ntikuma [n-tee-koo-mah], stopped this figure from hoarding all the world's wisdom in a tree. He trapped a python, a leopard, a dwarf, and the Mmoboro Hornets, and traded them with the sky god, Nyame [nee-ah-may], for all the (*) stories of the world. This god's greed led him to tie his web around each of his eight legs, which became very thin when the web was pulled. For 10 points, name this West African trickster god, who took the form of a spider.

ANSWER: Kwaku Anansi

Result: 828 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 54531

Question: A scripture about this deity takes the form of a discussion between Maitreya and Parashara, and describes this god rising from the sea inside Brahmanda, an enormous egg. An incarnation of this deity appears to Arjun in the (*) Bhagavad Gita. Rama and Krishna are two of the ten avatars of this god, who often appears blue and with four arms. For 10 points, name this Hindu preserver god, who forms the Trimurti with Brahma and Shiva.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 829 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 55142

Question: This figure went fishing with Hymir ["HIGH"-meer] to try to catch a monstrous son of Angrboda ["anger"-boh-dah], and was honored for lifting the paw of the cat, which turned out to be an enormous snake in disguise. This deity forced (*) Loki to obtain golden threads to replace the hair of Sif, this god's wife. He is fated to die at Ragnarök [RAG-nah-rock] after battling Jörmungandr [YORE-moon-gahn-dur]. This god wields Mjölnir [mee-YOLL-neer], a short-handled hammer, and is the son of Odin. For 10 points, name this Norse thunder god.

ANSWER: Thor (accept Donar or Thunar)

Result: 830 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 54544

Question: This mythical resident of Lemnos was born parthenogenetically, and built a trick throne to ensnare his mother. This figure created the first woman, Pandora, and split Zeus's head open to release Athena. This god created a fine net to trap (*) Ares and this god's wife, Aphrodite, in his lair beneath a volcano. For 10 points, name this son of Hera, the deformed Greek god of fire and patron of smiths.

ANSWER: Hephaestus (accept Vulcan until "Greek" is read)

Result: 831 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 55161

Question: This school believed that the purpose of life was to live virtuously and self-sufficiently with Nature. One member of this philosophic school asked Alexander the Great to get out of his sunlight, slept in a bathtub in the street, and walked the street carrying a lantern searching for an (*) honest man. Diogenes of Sinope was a member of, for 10 points, what Ancient Greek school of philosophy whose name now refers to a distrusting lack of faith in others?

ANSWER: Cynicism (accept word forms)

Result: 832 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 55170

Question: In this myth system, the four Bacabs, one for each direction, were responsible for holding up the sky. In one of its myths, a bird who thinks he's the sun and moon is killed after his teeth are replaced with corn. Seven Macaw is defeated by Hunahpu [hoo-nah-poo] and (*) Xbalanque [sh'BAH-lahn-kay], the "hero twins" of this mythology, who also played the ball game in Xibalba [shee-BAHL-bah], the underworld. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican myth system whose calendar supposedly predicted that the world would end in 2012.

ANSWER: Mayan mythology

Result: 833 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 55182

Question: This figure helped his son and daughter-in-law, Deucalion [doo-kay-lee-on] and Pyrra [pee-rah], survive a flood which killed the rest of humanity. To establish which parts of an animal would be sacrificed, he presented an Olympian with the choice of (*) meat or bones wrapped in fat. Before being freed by Heracles, this deity was chained to a rock, and an eagle ate his liver every day. For 10 points, identify this Greek Titan who stole fire from the gods.

ANSWER: Prometheus

Result: 834 | SCOP Novice | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 55191

Question: This man wins one battle by exploding a bottle of the nectar amrit. Earlier, he had defeated Varuna by threatening to destroy the ocean. This character is opposed by a rakshasa king from Lanka, but kills (*) Ravana by firing an arrow into his chest. With the help of the monkey king Hanuman, he rescues his wife, Sita. This hero, the seventh avatar of Vishnu, is followed by Krishna as avatar. For 10 points, name this prince, the subject of a namesake Hindu epic.

ANSWER: Rama (accept Ramayana)

Result: 835 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Chris Ray | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 36531

Question: A mythical ruler from this modern-day country was tricked into attending a dwarven wedding only to return two centuries later and find it conquered; that king, Herla, became the basis for this country's variant on the Wild Hunt myth. A temple in this country to the deity Nodens may have inspired its "Green Man" architectural motif. One of this country's most popular folk legends describes a young bride who suffocates in a chest beneath a branch of mistletoe during a game of hide-and-seek. According to one of its legends, a seafaring hero left a snare drum that can supposedly be used to summon him in an hour of national danger. This country's more famous national mythos include a crippled ruler whose kingdom decays around him until the arrival of Bors and two other heroes. The Battle of Camlann saw the death of this country's greatest mythical figure at the hands of Mordred, after which he departed for Avalon. For 10 points, identify this modern-day country mythically founded by King Arthur.

ANSWER: England [accept Great Britain or the United Kingdom; anti-prompt on "Scotland" or "Wales" since there's plenty of overlap, though the clues are technically exclusive]

Result: 836 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Dartmouth + University of Washington | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 36551

Question: One figure in this culture's myths is lured to his death by a crab made out of prairie grass, bamboo and stone. Earlier, that figure killed four hundred gods of alcohol by toppling a house. This culture's myths describe how an arrogant figure had his teeth and eyes replaced with white corn after he was blasted with a blowgun. A key location in this culture's myths contains rivers of pus and blood and a house where knives fly. The Dominican Francisco Ximénez is responsible for compiling a "Council Book" of this culture. This culture's villains include Zipacna and his father Seven Macaw, and many demons from Xibalba, its underworld. For 10 points, Hunahpu and Xbalanque are the Hero twins of what Pre-Columbian culture?

ANSWER: Mayans

Result: 837 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Editors 1 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 36576

Question: This god killed a three headed human who used his first head to read the Vedas, his second head to feed himself, and his third head for surveying the world. After slaying the youth Trisiras, the Brahmin Tvashtri created an enemy of this god that could not be defeated during night or day, nor with a weapon that was wet or dry; that's why this god used froth to kill that figure during twilight. The realm of this god, which is sometimes called Devaloka, is populated with figures like Urvashi, one of many "nymphs of pleasure" called Apsaras that are married to the celestial musicians called Gandharvas. This god's realm of Swarga can be found on Mount Meru, and he uses a stack of sea foam to defeat his enemy Ahi, or Vritra. This god uses a white elephant named Airavata as a mount, and he also uses the Vajra as a weapon. For 10 points, name this Vedic god of storms.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 838 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Editors 2 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 36593

Question: This figure's parents received an oracle that one of their children will marry a dragon which will bring much destruction. In one adventure, this hero visits the source of the rivers Cocytus and Styx to obtain some black water that is guarded by a dragon. Both of this figure's siblings perished when they jumped off a cliff in the hopes that they could become more beautiful. A talking tower tells this figure how to descend into the underworld, and ants assist her in sorting some grains. She plans on committing suicide while searching out some golden fleece, but a reed restores her hope. Her last voyage sees her put some of Proserpina's beauty in a box. Eventually, she is able to appease Venus and marry her son. For 10 points, identify this figure from Roman myth who is granted immortality when she gets married to Cupid.

ANSWER: Psyche

Result: 839 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Editors 3 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 36616

Question: In describing the preparation of a magician, The Book of the Heavenly Cow outlines how an image of this goddess would be carved onto the initiate's mouth. Emily Teeter argued that during the Ramesside period, all religious sacrifices were made to this goddess. One early source states that this goddess ruled over a golden age, but she withdrew to the heavens once humanity tried to manipulate her. Like Isis, this goddess was capable of reviving the dead by flapping her wings. Ancient Egyptian pharaohs and gods were said to live by this goddess, as she was a representation of the cosmic order. This goddess, who lived in the Hall of the Two Truths, was often represented with an object that was used in a ritual conducted by Anubis. For 10 points, identify this goddess whose feather was used to weigh the souls of the dead.

ANSWER: Ma'at or Maat

Result: 840 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Ike Jose + Tanay Kothari | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 36627

Question: The Orphic Argonautica contains a first-person account of an encounter with this figure that had the power to reverse waves. Several scholiasts claim that this villain was a thief that stole Heracles's cattle and was subsequently struck by one of Zeus's thunderbolts. In The Odyssey, Odysseus describes how he was trapped by the powers of this monster from sunrise until the time of day when a judge refuses to hear any more cases and goes home. An encounter with this creature in the Aeneid is presaged by Anchises pointing out a prophecy given by Helenos regarding this beast. After an encounter with this figure, Aeneas's crew washes ashore on the land of the cyclops. Odysseus saves himself from her by suspending himself from a fig tree until his raft is ejected. She sucks up water three times a day off the coast of Sicily. For 10 points, name this mythological alternative to Scylla.

ANSWER: Charybdis

Result: 841 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Ladue | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 36651

Question: Two answers required. The breakup of this couple causes holy water to turn into black water and wine to turn into blood. The seventh letter of Ovid's Heroides concerns this couple, one of whom recalls that the voice of one of the Eumenides spoke at their wedding. One of them is served by the honorable maid Barce, who assists her in burning a bridal bed, clothing and weapons of the other. Their wedding is marked by a rainstorm mixed with hail and occurs after the two of them fled into a cave. The female member of this couple had rejected the hand of a Gaetulian prince named Iarbas and is advised by her sister Anna. That woman had fled Tyre after the death of her husband Pygmalion and founds a city in ancient Libya. For 10 points, name this couple that consists of the queen of Carthage and the hero of a poem by Virgil.

ANSWER: Dido and Aeneas [accept in either order; accept Elissa for Dido]

Result: 842 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Michigan A | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 36669

Question: A goatherd of this kingdom had his nose and ears chopped off before doggies were allowed to feast on his genitals. The ancient god Phorcys made his realm this locale. A traveller to this kingdom duels with the arrogant messenger Arnaeus and wins by shattering his jaw; that traveller later has an ox's hoof thrown at him by Ctesippus. It is ruled by a man whose servants include Melanthius, the loyal cowherd Philoeteus, and the swineherd Eumaeus. Antinous and Eurymachus vie for the hand of its queen. A dung pile in this kingdom is the location of a loyal doggie named Argos, who recognizes his master's return. It is ruled by a man who was detained by Calypso after the Trojan War, and that king has a son named Telemachus. For 10 points, identify this island kingdom ruled by Odysseus.

ANSWER: Ithaca or Ithaka

Result: 843 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Mike Bentley | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 36697

Question: In Japanese tradition, the Baku was a creature which subsisted entirely on these objects. In Welsh legend, the occurrence of one of these entities prompts Emperor Maxen to send out his army to seek out a beautiful maiden whose name is Helen. One of these entities titles a section of The Mabinogion and appears after Rhonabwy resides next to a yellow ox-hide. In Greek myth, these events are governed by a realm with a gate of horn and a gate of ivory. The preponderance of these events forces Odin to ride down to Niflheim and question a volva about why they are inflicting pain to his son Baldr. A willow hoop often functioned as a catcher of these objects among the Ojibwe. A child of Nyx and Erebus also presided over these objects and was known as one of the Oneiroi. For 10 points, the god Morpheus has a realm over what sometimes prophetic events that usually occurs when one is asleep?

ANSWER: dreams [prompt on "visions"; accept nightmares]

Result: 844 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Penn A | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 36724

Question: In The Voyage of Maelduin, one of these animals inhabits a magical palace and can randomly shape shift into an arrow to kill people. In Egyptian legend, the deity Mut roamed the desert as one of these animals while in exile. One of these animals was the son of a pig that occupied the isle of Anglesey and ate 180 men every meal until it was slain by Sir Kay. One deity associated with these animals has a name reflecting her patronage of ointment jars and is regarded as a gentler aspect to the fierce Sekhmet. The chariot of Freya was pulled by these animals, which often represented the head of a goddess that produced Maahes with her consort Atum-Ra at her cult center of Bubastis. For 10 points, the Egyptian god Bastet had the head of what feline animal?

ANSWER: domestic cats [or pussy; or kittens; or kitty-cat; prompt on "felids" or "felines" until mention]

Result: 845 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Rice | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 36734

Question: In one story, this figure is asked by his enemy to fight at Grjottungard. In that story, he fights against a foe with a triangular heart of stone who is assisted by a man made of clay. In The Poetic Edda, he shatters a magic chalice against the head of Tyr's father as part of a quest to find a kettle. This god, who once carried Aurvandil across an icy river, still has pieces of whetstone lodged in his head since the sorceress Groa failed to remove them all. In one memorable incident, this slayer of Hrungnir failed to lift a cat, wrestle an old woman, or drain a drinking horn. This figure travelled with Loki and his servant Thialfi to confront Utgard-Loki. In another story, he dressed as a woman to deceive the giant Thrym, who stole the Mjollnir. For 10 points, identify this Norse God of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 846 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: St. Joseph A + Rutgers | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 36759

Question: Stephanus of Byzantium states that after one of these events a trio of figures turned white and jumped into the sea at Aptera. In Book VI of the Aeneid, Aeneas's men bury a man that was killed by Triton after participating in one of these; that man is Misenus. Instead of having sex for a series of consecutive nights, a boast at one of these events basically caused Thamyris to go blind and become maimed. One of these events inspired by Hera's goading included the creation of a series of crowns for the children of King Peirus and saw the sirens kill themselves. Another of these events took place at Mt. Tmolus and ended with one figure being given the ears of an ass by the victorious Apollo. Marsyas was flayed alive by Apollo after losing, for 10 points, what kind of event, which followed his discovery of Athena's aulos, or double-flute?

ANSWER: musical contest [accept clear knowledge equivalents; accept singing contest or more specific answers like lyre contest]

Result: 847 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: Texas A&M + VCU A | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 36787

Question: This man was referred to as hypolispos after he sat down for so long that he left his buttocks behind attached to some rocks. Diodorus Siculus states that he was responsible for incorporating many demes into his kingdom. This man's son Acamas was one of the figures that hid in the Trojan Horse. While travelling around Scyros, this man was murdered by King Lycomedes. In his early life, he took a path around the Saronic Gulf that featured six entrances to the underworld. He was good friends with the king of the Lapiths that was named Pirithous. He made the Amazon Hippolyta his wife. During one adventure, he killed the year-king Cercyon and a figure that fit people to his bed, Procrustes. This man left Athens in a black-sailed ship and successfully returned after leaving Ariadne on Naxos. For 10 points, name this hero, a slayer of the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 848 | Terrapin | 2013 | Round: UVA | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 36798

Question: The one-eyed Irish hag Muircheartach inhabited one of these locations. A compendium of old Chinese folklore written by Yu the Great is named for mountains and these places. One of these places is also the residence of an Ugaritic Elohim that fought against the son of Dagan. In Chinese myth, a resident of one of these locations is a dragon who bonked his head into Mount Bùzhōu, forcing Nǚwā to fix its tilt. The god Yam dwells in one of these places, as does Gòng Gōng. A god from one of these places assists in building a bridge to Lanka when Rama fires arrows into his domain. It is the domain of Varuna. The Lokasenna takes place in a structure in one of these realms, which is ruled over by Ran, the mother of Heimdall. It is also ruled by Ran's wife, Aegir. The Greek god of one of these place was also in charge of horses and earthquakes. For 10 points, identify this domain of Poseidon.

ANSWER: seas or oceans [prompt on "the abyss" or anything similar; accept shipwrecks on the first clue]

Result: 849 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Chicago A & Illinois B | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 45351

Question: In the Vulgate Cycle, the mother of this man had the true name Helizabel, though she was called Amite. This man is said to be the last of Nascien's line. Therefore, this figure was the only one capable of wielding the shield of Evalach with impunity, a shield whose insignia was made by the blood from the bleeding nose of Josephus, the son of Joseph of Arimathea. This person was conceived when Dame Brusen's sorcery transformed a woman who had been rescued from a (*) scalding bath. That mother of his, the daughter of king Pelles, was trapped in the castle Corbenic. In Malory's account, this figure is the one who finally sits in the Siege Perilous. For 10 points, name this character, who, alongside Bors and Percival, achieved the grail, the flawless son of Lancelot and Elaine.

ANSWER: Sir Galahad

Result: 850 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Chicago B & Yale B | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 45384

Question: In one story, this god's wife demands that he be allowed to build a palace, lest she make another god's gray hair run red with blood, and he dispatches emissaries to speak with Kothar and Khasis. This god was once invited to a banquet of mud, before which he had intercourse with a (*) calf to gain strength. This god's body was retrieved from the underworld by Shapash, and his reign was taken over by Athtar, before Anat avenges his apparent murder by mutilating Mot. This god's role in seasonal change is described in the Ras Shamra tablets, and this son of Dagon resided on Mount Saphon after he defeated Yam. For 10 points, name this Caananite "lord" and fertility god whose cult was often denounced by Jewish prophets.

ANSWER: Baal

Result: 851 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Chicago C & South Carolina A | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 45387

Question: According to Chinese mythology, this animal comes second-to-last in the Great Race despite being a good swimmer because it frolicked along the way to the banquet, only beating the pig. The akhlut of Inuit mythology is able to shift between an orca and this animal. Erigone is able to find her father's grave when Maera, one of these animals, leads her there and consequently jumps off a cliff due to grief. In Irish mythology, Nuada kept some of these animals, which could heal wounds by (*) licking. In Welsh mythology, Bran keeps ones with red ears. Morrigan persistently tries to tempt Cuchulain into breaking his vow to never eat this animal's meat. One of these animals will swallow the moon at Ragnarok. This animal was occasionally sacrificed to Hecate. For 10 points, name this animal whose kind includes the three-headed Cerberus.

ANSWER: dogs [or hounds; or wolves]

Result: 852 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Columbia A & Ottawa | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 45565

Question: In The Illiad, this deity strikes Artemis on the ear, causing Artemis to leave battle and climb into Zeus's lap. The birth of this deity under the lygos tree was celebrated in the Toneia at the sanctuary of Samos, while the pear tree and cow were sacred to this entity. This goddess was once handcuffed with a golden chain and hanged with anvils dangling from her feet. She is the mother of Eileithya and (*) Hebe, and she wears the polos. Described as "white-armed," she dogs the steps of a person who, as a cow, is the origin of the term Bosphorus. For 10 points, name this tormentor of Io, the eldest daughter of Kronos and Rhea and mother of Eris and Ares, who attacks those who sleep with her brother-consort Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera [or Juno]

Result: 853 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Columbia B & Illinois A | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 45792

Question: This goddess became bored when her husband was out fighting the elephant-eating Bashe and Chiseltooth, and drank some mysterious liquids that caused her to start floating away. This goddess's husband joined her after being beaten to death with the limb of a peach tree. This goddess was married to a character who shot nine of the ten (*) suns, Houyi. She constantly receives the elixir of life from a pharmaceutically inclined jade rabbit. Lanterns honor her during the Mid-Autumn Festival. Buzz Aldrin discussed this deity with mission control shortly before the Apollo 11 landing. For 10 points, identify this Chinese goddess of the moon.

ANSWER: Chang'e

Result: 854 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Dartmouth A & WUSTL | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 45921

Question: This action is completed using reeds by the Mongolian god Erlik after he falls to earth in the form of a black goose and bribes Ulgan's guard dog with a furry coat so it will look away. An Aboriginal myth describes the knife-wielding Ungambiluka performing this action, which involves sweat droplets in a Slavic tale. In Chinese mythology, this action is either performed by Nü Wa swinging a vine through the mud or fleas jumping off of (*) Pangu. The Popul Vuh describes failed attempts at this action involving wet clay and wood before success using maize dough, while Villi, Ve and Odin perform this action by carving an ash log along with its elm counterpart. For 10 points, name this action performed by God in His image to create a master for the animals, resulting in the genesis of Adam.

ANSWER: creating the first man [accept any answers that are clearly about the creation of humanity; prompt on creating animals or equivalents]

Result: 855 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Dartmouth A & WUSTL | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 45931

Question: One sanctuary of this deity includes a stoa with an Ionic colonnade above a Doric one, a sacred pool and several cisterns. Besides that one at Perachora, a sanctuary that housed a chryselephantine statue of this deity by Polykleitos in its New Temple was excavated by Thomas Gordon at Argos. One temple of this deity that was mistakenly attributed to (*) Neptune is associated with two bothroi and stands near another one, nicknamed the "Basilica," with flattened Doric capitals, a divided naos and pronounced entasis at Paestum. The Olympic torch is lit at the temple of this non-Zeus deity in Olympia, where Hermes and the Infant Dionysus was discovered. Another temple of this goddess, located near the Pythagoreion, celebrated her birth under the lygos tree, housed the Geneleos group and depicted her with the horns of a cow. For 10 points, name this goddess whose temple at Samos kept a flock of peacocks.

ANSWER: Hera [accept Juno; accept Heraion]

Result: 856 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Delaware & Michigan State A | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 45945

Question: In one work, this thinker argues that truth arises from "a mobile army of metaphors, metonyms, and anthropomorphisms." This thinker attacks the "New Faith" of David Strauss in one essay, which appears in a collection with a work that distinguishes the antiquarian, monumental, and critical methods of history. This thinker argues in another work that metaphysics comes from dreams and warns against worshipping genius. This philosopher writes that (*) beasts of prey are not evil because their actions originate in their strength, and that morality arises from ressentiment in On the Genealogy of Morals. This philosopher explains behavior through the "will to power" and used eternal recurrence to illustrate the idea of the Ubermensch For 10 points, name this German author of Twilight of the Idols and Thus Spoke Zarathustra who wrote "God is dead" in The Gay Science.

ANSWER: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

Result: 857 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Delaware & Michigan State A | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 45956

Question: This god was suckled by a male boar and seawater when he was born at the edge of the Nine Worlds. In the Lokesenna, Loki says that this god has a muddy back and this god is also said to be the palest of all the gods. The name Gullintanni refers to this god's golden teeth. This god fathered the three (*) castes of man when he took the form of Rig. This god retrieves the Brisingamen for Freyja by transforming into a seal and defeating Loki. This god arrives at Baldr's funeral upon his horse Gulltopr and he wields the sword Hofund. This god is the son of nine mothers and kills and is killed by Loki at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this Norse god that sounds his Gjallarhorn to signal Ragnarok, and is the guardian of Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdallr [accept Rig until mentioned]

Result: 858 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Editors 1 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 45973

Question: Adrastus betrothed a daughter to Polynices after remembering a prophecy about seeing a boar on the shield of Tydeus and this animal on Polynices's shield. The stuttering of Battus was cured by seeing one of these animals, and Battus founded a city named for a maiden that Apollo spotted wrestling one of them.  The Hyades were created as stars after Hyas was (*) killed by one of these animals, which pulled Rhea's chariot. After having sex in a temple of Zeus, Hippomenes and Atalanta were turned into these animals. A gate named after these animals protected Mycenae. For 10 points, name this animal whose impenetrable skin was avoided when Herakles throttled one to death in the labor of the Nemean one.

ANSWER: lions [or lionesses]

Result: 859 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Editors 2 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 45987

Question: Depictions of this god often include the mysterious "leontocephaline" as well. This god is often depicted between two supporters who carry torches pointing in opposite directions, Cautes and Cautopates. He is also found underneath the quadriga‐riding Sol. He was carrying a dagger and a torch when he was born from a rock. Some devotees of this god were known as the (*) "Bridesman" or "sun‐ runner," with the lowest rank of initiaties called "ravens." Worshipped in underground stone caverns, this god engages in the "tauroctony," or ritual bull‐slaying. For 10 points, name this imported Persian god who was the object of a cult popular with Roman soldiers from the third century CE onward.

ANSWER: Mithras

Result: 860 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Editors 3 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 46077

Question: One person who was charged with containing this event was banished to Feather Mountain after failing. That person spent several years reforming the calendar and standardizing weights and measures before directly engaging with this phenomenon. Advice on dealing with thise event was provided by the Four Mountains, and the use of a magic substance called (*) Xirang to control this event was proposed by Gun. It was finally contained after thirteen years of work unblocking Mount Longmen, overseen by Yu the Great. For 10 points, name this cataclysm in Chinese mythology, which was solved with the invention of irrigation canals and the rise of the Xia Dynasty.

ANSWER: the great Chinese flood

Result: 861 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Georgia Tech & Williams | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 46103

Question: The scholar Tzetzes claimed to have been taught not to lie by this man. This man preached the superiority of the sun over all gods and advocated homosexuality. After his death Apollo turned to stone a serpent which tried to eat his head. Heracles killed this man's brother (*) Linus after Linus taught Heracles this man's art. Zone [ZOH-nay] is the site of rocks and trees which this man moved, and he protected the Argonauts from the Sirens' song. After his death, his head floated to Lesbos and made prophecies. For 10 points, name this man who calmed Cerberus with his lyre when he went down to Hades to save his wife Eurydice.

ANSWER: Orpheus

Result: 862 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Harvard & Virginia B | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 46131

Question: In one aspect, this goddess took the form of a black winged horse and was given the epithet Aganippe. An oak tree sacred to this deity was cut down by Erisychthon, whom she punished with unrelenting hunger that resulted in his selling Mestra into slavery. This goddess gave birth to the immortal horse Arion after being raped by her brother in the form of a horse. Her attempt to make Demophon immortal was interrupted by his mother Metanira, so she took his brother Triptolemus under her wing, leading to the celebration of the (*) Eleusinian Mysteries. The seasons came to a halt while this goddess searched for her daughter, who had swallowed a pomegranate seed in the underworld after being abducted by Hades. For 10 points, name this mother of Persephone and Greek goddess of agriculture.

ANSWER: Demeter

Result: 863 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Haverford & Michigan State B | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 46362

Question: This character tricked the priest of Tollan into exile. Every year, one boy was chosen to become this God's embodiment on earth and was treated with food and women before being sacrificed. He kidnapped Tlaloc's bride, and forced that goddess of fertility, (*) Xochiquetzal, to be his wife. In his human form, he has black stripes on his face and is represented by obsidian. His decision to use himself as bait for the primeval sea monster Cipactli resulted in his foot getting bitten off, but he and Quetzalcoatl still managed to build the land out of Cipactli. For 10 points, identify this Aztec god who rivaled Quetzalcoatl, and whose name means "smoking mirror."

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca

Result: 864 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Maryland A & Ohio State A | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 46737

Question: This chracter shares her name with the goddess of intoxication and may be one of her human manifestations. She killed Clothra while she was pregnant, but that led to her death as that son, Furbaide, survived and killed her by slinging a piece of cheese while she was bathing. An important event that she sparked began with an argument with Ailill over who was richer. She had a huge sexual appetite that only (*) Fergus Mac Roich could satisfy. Fergus also protects her with a shield while she lets out an impossibly voluminous amount of urine to create three dykes. For 10 points, name this Queen of Connaught who sparked the Cattle Raid of Cooley, which brought her at odds with Cuchulainn.

ANSWER: Queen Maeve [accept Medb, accept Medba]

Result: 865 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Maryland B & Michigan A | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 46810

Question: This god made a long journey to India and was raised by the Nysaean nymphs according to some stories. One of his followers was a pilot from Maeonia who first encountered him as a sleeping boy on his ship; that follower, Acoetes, was the only one who recognized his true identity and was thus was saved from being transformed, unlike his crew of Tyrrhenian (*) pirates. When this deity tried to bring his worship to Thebes, he was resisted by the king, whom he punished by having him torn apart by a group of women including Agave. Jupiter swore by the Styx to fulfill any request that this god's mother might ask of him, resulting in his mother dying when Jupiter showed her his full glory. For 10 points, name this son of Jupiter and Semele, a god of wine

ANSWER: Bacchus [or Dionysus]

Result: 866 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Maryland B & Michigan A | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 46814

Question: This figure's second husband was driven out of England for his superior craftsmanship and skill at making saddles. That husband set free a mouse in exchange for the release of this figure and her son. She became stuck to a golden bowl while searching for her son, who disappeared while hunting a white boar. This figure was betrothed to (*) Gwawl, but her first husband won her hand with the creation of the game "Badger-in-the-Bag". This figure's son was discovered and raised by Teyrnon, but she was accused of eating her child after her handmaidens smeared puppy blood on her face and hands. She married Manawydan after the death of her first husband, who was the lord of Dyfed. For 10 points, name this figure from Welsh mythology, the wife of Pwyll and mother of Pryderi who appears in the first and third branches of the Mabinogion.

ANSWER: Rhiannon

Result: 867 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Michigan B & Yale A | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 46759

Question: One woman who lived in this city was the mother of Calais and Zetes by her husband Boreas; that woman was Orithyia. Another woman who lived in this city wove a tapestry narrating how her brother-in-law cut out her tongue; that woman was Philomela. Both women were related to a king of this city sometimes said to be half (*) dragon, Cecrops. While vying to become patron deity of this city, Poseidon created a spring, but was passed over for another deity who made an olive tree grow here. Perhaps the most famous king of this city forgot to replace his ship's black sails with white ones after leaving Ariadne on Naxos during his return to this city from a successful slaying of the Minotaur. For 10 points, name this city once ruled by Theseus.

ANSWER: Athens

Result: 868 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Penn & Wake Forest | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 46776

Question: During the Trojan war, this man, along with his twin brother, carried Sarpedon away. Hera gave this god a golden throne, a footstool, and the Grace Pasithea as a wife. He lives in a hollow mountain in Cimmeria and is attended by Aergia. This deity's attendants are responsible for controlling the two (*) gates into his realm, one of which is made of ivory and one of which is made of horn. This god spends his days reclining on a couch in his palace, which has poppies growing outside and is located in the underworld. He is alternately seen as the brother or father of the Oneroi, consisting of Icelus, Phantasos, and Morpheus. For 10 points, name this brother of the death god Thanatos, the Greek god of sleep.

ANSWER: Hypnos

Result: 869 | VCU Closed | 2013 | Round: Rugers & Virginia A | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 46823

Question: In an Okanagan tale, Coyote received a wife from one of these creatures after he peed on the corpse of that one, and later, Coyote was unable to defecate because he killed that wife, who was also one of these creatures and prevented them from appearing further west. In a Pawnee story, Tirawa placed one of these in the northwest to hold back the great flood, but the world will be destroyed when it loses all of its hair. In an Assiniboine tale, Iktomi steals wives from a group of these creatures, and a Lakota myth tells how a (*) white one of these creatures provided the ceremonial pipe. In another Lakota tale, Iktomi tricked humanity into coming to the surface by hunting these creatures, and the Moon provided huge herds of these animals for starving people in a Pawnee story. For 10 points, name this large mammal, pivotal to the life on the Great Plains.

ANSWER: American Buffalo [or Bison]

Result: 870 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 1 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 45863

Question: Diodorus Siculus attributes the "walking pose" of statues of youths called kouroi to this figure, who was also claimed as an ancestor by Socrates. This man's skill in sculpture and metalworking is also shown on a pair of golden temple doors located variously in Sicily or Cumae. This man took refuge at the court of King Cocalus, whose daughters boiled his pursuer alive after he appeared searching for a man to thread a string through a seashell. When the Athenians sought to claim this figure as one of their own, they explained his departure from the city with the story that he grew jealous of his nephew for inventing the saw and threw him off the Acropolis. This man's own creations include a wooden cow used by Pasiphae and two pairs of wax and feather wings. For 10 points, name this architect of the Labyrinth and father of Icarus.

ANSWER: Daedalus

Result: 871 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 10 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 48101

Question: In Vietnamese mythology, a man performs this activity to recover a fragment of Heaven's Will and gives it to Le Loi when he joins his army. The powerful Sumerian priest Adapa stopped the wind from blowing because it interfered with this activity. Another man who makes his livelihood doing this activity opens a box containing his old age after spending 300 years with Otohime in the underwater palace of Ryujin. A specialist in this activity is crowned king of Seriphos as a reward for hospitably treating Danae and her son Perseus. In order to perform this activity, a god decapitates the best ox belonging to the owner of a mile-wide cauldron, but that giant's cowardice jeopardizes this activity. For 10 points, James Z. wants you to name how Urashima Taro and Dictys earned their livings, an activity that Hymir and Thor were performing when they nearly killed the Midgard Serpent.

ANSWER: fishing [or being fisherman]

Result: 872 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 15 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 48207

Question: The Greek fisherman Glaucus underwent this process after inadvertently eating an herb sown by Cronos. When mythical Greeks are forced to jump into the sea, those lucky ones who do not transform into birds sometimes complete this process undergone by Melicertes and his mother Leucothea. In art, Iris often accompanies those undergoing this process, which was earned by a woman after she sorted jumbled grains with the help of some ants and collected golden wool from vicious sheep. Heracles is said to have entered this process through ritual burning. Some Romans preferred to believe that, rather than being torn to pieces by angry senators, Romulus underwent this process and became Quirinus. A comet was taken as evidence that Julius Caesar had undergone this process. For 10 points, name this process by which one becomes a god.

ANSWER: apotheosis [or deification; or becoming a god until it is read; prompt on "dying"]

Result: 873 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 2 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 46036

Question: One figure of this name, a Naiad, bore the Lapith king Hypseus to the river god Peneus. A mortal of this name was the only survivor when some of her sisters were sacrificed and the others killed themselves to save the city of their father, Erechtheus. That woman married the infertile Xuthus, who eventually accepted her son by Apollo as his own and was rewarded by being able to father Achaeus and Dorus. In addition to that mother of Ion, another woman of this name meaning "princess" is also called Glauce and was killed by a poisoned, flaming dress sent by the vengeful Medea. Another unfortunate woman of this name predicted her husband's future adventures while a ghost after her unexplained death. For 10 points, give this name of the oldest daughter of Priam and Hecuba, the lost Trojan wife of Aeneas.

ANSWER: Creusa

Result: 874 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 2013 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 46534

Question: The king of the Bebrycians is killed in a boxing match with one of the major characters of this poem. One character in this poem is killed by the shepherd Caphaurus while trying to rustle sheep, and another character, the swift runner Euphemus, uses a dove to scout out when it is safe to pass the Symplegades. This poem contains an origin myth for the island of Thera and the Libyan colonists originating there, involving a clod of earth gifted by Triton. This poem also explains the flesh-colored pebbles of Elba by saying it is where the central characters wiped their hands, and why the race of Anaphe is conducted while carrying amphorae. A series of foundation myths appears throughout this poem, whose central quest is aided by a priestess of Hecate. For 10 points, name this Callimachean epic written by Apollonius of Rhodes about the voyage to Colchis to retrieve the Golden Fleece by Jason.

ANSWER: the Argonautica

Result: 875 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 2013 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 46537

Question: . Pausanias relates that a fisherman recovered a giant bone attributed to this figure, some of whose remains were lost at sea while being brought from Pisa to Troy. This lover of Poseidon exiled his surviving sons after they killed their brother Chrysippus. Because this man was insufficiently confident in his horsemanship, he bribed his opponent's charioteer to damage that opponent's wheels. This man, who thus caused the death of Oenomaus, did not suffer from the curse that ensued after he killed the charioteer Myrtilus as well, but rather had many children with the wife he won, Hippodamia. After a mistake by the distracted Demeter, this man's missing shoulder had to be replaced with ivory. For 10 points, name this father of Thyestes and Atreus, whose own father Tantalus attempted to serve him to the gods at a feast.

ANSWER: Pelops

Result: 876 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 3 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 46254

Question: This man speaks a curse on a horse's head mounted atop a hazel-pole, then turns the head inland toward the curse's victims. By offering him disgusting seaweed and a drinking-horn full of milk, this man's daughter convinces him to come out of isolation following his son's death. As a small child, this man defies his father by showing up to a drinking party and originates a blood feud by axe-murdering another kid who beats him in a ballgame. During this man's service under the banner of King Athelstan, his elder brother Thorulfur dies, so this man marries Thorulfur's widow, his foster-sister Asgerdur. The first thirty chapters of his namesake work describe the conflict between his father Skallagrim and King Harald of Norway. His saga, which focuses on his enmity with Harald's son Erik Bloodaxe, ends with the conversion of his son to Christianity. For 10 points, name this farmer, warrior, and outlaw, the hero of an Icelandic saga

ANSWER: Egill Skallagrimsson [prompt on Skallagrimsson until "Skallagrim" is read]

Result: 877 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 5 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 46574

Question: This was the first-born son of a woman who was born inside of a fish. This man himself was conceived when his mother and a visiting sage had sex on a riverbank shrouded by mist. This man advises a woman who had given birth to a ball of flesh to cut the flesh into 100 pieces and put them each in a different jar of ghee. Because of this man's foul odor and unkempt appearance, one princess closed her eyes upon seeing him and a second became pale at his touch, so his children with those women were born blind and pale-skinned. Thus with those sexual hijinks, this son of Shantanu and Satyavati became grandfather to both the Pandavas and Kauravas. He is better known for employing Ganesh as a scribe, dictating to him a work which his disciple Vaisampayana narrates. For 10 points, name this sage credited with compiling the Mahabharata

ANSWER: Veda Vyasa [or Krishna Dvaipayana; prompt on Vishnu, since he's a minor avatar, but definitely don't accept "Krishna" on its own]

Result: 878 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 7 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 48040

Question: In a humorous story, this object was once tossed at a sad animal, who then immediately prophesied the end of the world, advising the tosser to prepare food for five days. Depictions of several gods of this substance symbolize the numeral eight. Young women wore necklaces and people sprinkled their houses with blood to honor a green-scepter-wielding god of this substance, which was personified by two male deities, a tonsured and a foliated god, in Mayan art. Quetzalcoatl transformed into an ant to retrieve a sample of this substance to give to humanity. In Aztec mythology, it was presided over by the goddess Chicomecoatl and her male counterpart Centeotl, whose ears and headdress resemble this substance. For 10 points, name this staple crop in many Mesoamerican cultures.

ANSWER: maize [or Zea mays; accept corn]

Result: 879 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 8 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 48065

Question: This figure once defused an argument by stepping in for his home's usual cupbearer. This figure was brought in to fix a cursed chair by Dionysus, who intoxicated him and placed him on a donkey. This figure and his wife Aglaia are said to have golden automatons as servants. At Troy, this god rescued Achilles from the river Scamander. Eurynome and Thetis raised this father of Erichthonius after rescuing him at his major cult site, Lemnos. Because of his enmity toward Ares, this god cursed the necklace of Harmonia and created a fine but unbreakable net to shame Aphrodite. More charitable feelings led this god to create the armor of Achilles. This god is sometimes considered to be the offspring of only Hera, and his fall from Olympus was either caused by or caused his lameness. For 10 points, name this god of fire and blacksmiths.

ANSWER: Hephaestus [or Vulcan]

Result: 880 | VCU Open | 2013 | Round: 9 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 48080

Question: An old man in charge of Neleus' mares was changed into a rock after he broke his oath and betrayed Mercury's commission of this action to a disguised Mercury himself. An Italian story holds that an indignant Hercules strangled a man-eating monster so tightly that his eyes popped out after that monster's attempt to cover up this action failed. In the proem of the Odyssey, Homer assigns the blame for the death of Odysseus' men to their commission of this action on the island of Helios. The killing of Cacus indirectly resulted from Hercules' own commission of this action at the behest of Eurystheus, to accomplish which he had to kill the shepherd Eurytion and the two-headed dog Orthrus. As an apology for committing this action, a young Hermes used a tortoiseshell to create the lyre. For 10 points, name this action which consists of wrongfully obtaining the sort of animal into which Io was transformed.

ANSWER: stealing cattle [accept cows, bulls, or other reasonable equivalents for "cattle"; accept equivalents of "stealing"; prompt on equivalents of "stealing" that don't include the animal]

Result: 881 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Alabama + WUStL | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 56177

Question: A figure that emerged from one of these objects was accompanied on a trip to an island of ogres by a pheasant, dog, and monkey. A deity called either Shouxing or "The Old Man of the South Pole" is usually depicted holding a staff and this object. Three of these objects are instructed to help all living beings in the central reed plains. In a Japanese legend, a child named (*) Momotaro is found in one of these objects floating on a stream. Izanagi uses three of these objects to ward off thunder demons that chase him after he sees Izanami's corpse. Every 6,000 years, Xi Mang Wu would give out a special type of these. Han Xiang climbed a giant tree that produces these but slipped and fell. For 10 points, name these fruits, which in Chinese mythology grant immortality.

ANSWER: peaches [prompt on fruits]

Result: 882 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Alabama+Georgia Tech + WUSTL | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 31863

Question: A figure that emerged from one of these objects was accompanied on a trip to an island of ogres by a pheasant, dog, and monkey. A deity called either Shouxing or "The Old Man of the South Pole" is usually depicted holding a staff and this object. Three of these objects are instructed to help all living beings in the central reed plains. In a Japanese legend, a child named (*) Momotaro is found in one of these objects floating on a stream. Izanagi uses three of these objects to ward off thunder demons that chase him after he sees Izanami's corpse. Every 6,000 years, Xi Mang Wu would give out a special type of these. Han Xiang climbed a giant tree that produces these but slipped and fell. For 10 points, name these fruits, which in Chinese mythology grant immortality.

ANSWER: peaches [prompt on fruits]

Result: 883 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Bentley Gioia Hunter Lopez-Lago | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 31886

Question: The Iliad describes how this man's daughter Laoamia "was slain by the golden-rein'd Artemis wrathful." He was once tasked with defeating the Solymi. He completed one objective after his prey left the Hippocrene spring and spent a night in the Temple of Athena, where he found a golden bridle. One creature killed by this man died after it breathed (*) fire onto the lead-tipped spear this man had forced down its throat. After this father of Hippolchus and grandfather of Glaucon was accused of raping the wife of King Proetus, he was sent to the court of King Iobates to be killed. A gadfly sent by Zeus caused him to plummet to earth when he tried to ascend Mount Olympus. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who tamed Pegasus and defeated the Chimera.

ANSWER: Bellerophon [or Bellerophontes]

Result: 884 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Chicago B EDITED | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 31924

Question: A monster defeated by this god was described as "extending over hills and valleys" and having eyes like the winter cherry. This god lost his fingernails, toenails, and beard as punishment for some of his misdeeds. For a time, he and his bride lived at the Yaegaki Shrine. This god used a necklace to create five new gods, while three goddesses emerged from a sword he owned. In one story, this god turned (*) Kushinada into a comb before using sake to get a monster drunk. After wrecking some rice fields, this god threw a flayed horse at his sister, forcing her to hide in a cavern. Later, he retrieved the sword Kusanagi after slaying the eight-headed monster Orochi. For 10 points, name this brother of Amaterasu, the kami of the oceans and storms.

ANSWER: Susanoo [or Susanowo; or His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness]

Result: 885 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Dartmouth | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 31936

Question: A Narragansett story tells how this animal broke its tail falling out a tree after wishing for snow to play in. A Cree legend describes lynxes Achaanwaapush, a cannibalistic one. The Centzon Totochtin are four hundred of these animals who get hammered incredibly often. A procession of these animals bearing torches follows the mistress of the Wild Hunt, Holda. A superstition holds that you should repeat their name (*) three times on the first day of the month. In Chinese myth, one of these animals makes the elixir of life with Chang'e on the moon and another came in fourth place in a race that determined the order of the zodiac. Those with antlers are known as jackalopes. For 10 points, name this animal, one of whom hands out candy on Easter.

ANSWER: rabbits [accept lagomorphs; accept leporids; accept hares; accept bunnies; accept wabbits; accept specific species]

Result: 886 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Editors 3 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 32001

Question: In one appearance, this god curses frogs, elephants, and parrots for disclosing his hiding spots. Because he could not tell lies, this god was cursed by Brgu after he revealed the location of a Rakshasa's wife-to-be. This god dealt with his fear of death by hiding in plants upon seeing three brothers in the form of sticks die during a sacrifice. Consequently, this god was given the task of hotr and received (*) immortality through drinking soma. This consort of Svaha, often depicted with two heads and a pot belly, rides a ram and was nearly relieved of his duties after becoming too fat. He receives tribute to the rest of the gods by gluttonously devouring ghee through his seven tongues during sacrifices. For 10 points, name this Hindu god of fire.

ANSWER: Agni

Result: 887 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Editors 4 + VCU | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 32037

Question: One of these creatures was a ferryman for the Evenus River. Two of these creatures, Rhoecus and Hylaeus, were killed by Atalanta. One of them attempted to abduct the bride of his half-brother Pirithous. That incident involving Eurytion led to a battle in which these people lost to the (*) Lapiths. After the death of Pholus, one of them abducted Deianira and asked her to pour his poisoned blood on a cloak that Heracles put on. While most of this race came into being after the union of Ixion and Nephele, an immortal one of these people was a son of Cronus and Philyra who mentored heroes such as Jason, Asclepius, and Achilles. For 10 points, name this race, whose members included Nessus and Chiron, both of which were half man and half horse.

ANSWER: centaurs

Result: 888 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Editors 5 + Louisville A + Carleton | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 32042

Question: The Ingwaz rune depicts a figure that is equivalent to this god. This god's son Fiolnir was said to be the progenitor of the Yngling dynasty. This god had earlier met his wife in a grove known as Barri. One animal owned by this god was created by the dwarves and was golden-bristled; that (*) boar was named Gullinbursti. An item this god possessed could be folded up and put away when it was not being used. With the help of Skirnir, this god successfully wooed and married the giantess Gerd. This owner of the ship Skidbladnir and resident of Alfheim will not have his sword at Ragnarok, causing him to die swiftly at the hands of Surt. For 10 points, name this Norse god of fertility, the brother of Freya.

ANSWER: Freyr [accept Ing until "Yngling" is read]

Result: 889 | WIT | 2013 | Round: editors1 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 31972

Question: One character with this name was said to reside halfway up a seemingly endless cliff where a dark cloud always hovers. Another woman with this name was the daughter of Abrote, who fell in love with Minos and gave him the purple lock of hair belonging to her father Nisus. Heracles killed the former character before she was restored to life by her father. This character was once a (*) beautiful maiden who was loved by Glaucus, but a jealous Circe transformed her into her best-known form. This daughter of Phorcys was said to make the sound of barking dogs. This monster killed six of Odysseus' men when he sailed near the rocks where she lived. For 10 points, name this monster that resided in a body of water on the opposite side of Charybdis.

ANSWER: Scylla

Result: 890 | WIT | 2013 | Round: editors2 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 31988

Question: This creature broke an oath of friendship with a snake before becoming a companion to Etana. The thief of the Tablets of Destiny, Anzu, had the body of this animal. Before Zeus could kill Periphas with a thunderbolt, Periphas was changed into one of these animals by Apollo. An unnamed creature of this kind in Norse mythology has a (*) hawk sitting in between its eyes and resides at the top of Yggdrasil. A deity resembling this animal was the son of Kashyap and released his mother Vinata from Patala. Garuda resembles one of these animals, as did Zeus when he took this form to abduct Ganymede. The Aztecs founded Tenochtitlan after seeing one eating a snake perched atop a cactus. For 10 points, a griffin is half-lion half-what large predatory bird?

ANSWER: eagles [prompt on bird before it is mentioned at the end]

Result: 891 | WIT | 2013 | Round: GMU + Sheffield A + Chicago C | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 32075

Question: According to Pausanias, this man fought a battle in which he killed Khorea and Ariadne, earning the ire of Dionysus. This man's life probably ended when Megapenthes killed him in revenge for the death of Proetus, an action that prompted this man to switch from ruling Argos to Tiryns. As a child, this man was saved on the island of Seriphos by (*) Dictys. This man retrieved a wedding present for the supposed marriage of Hippodameia and Polydectes. After his return, he visited the funeral games of Teutamides, where his discus struck his grandfather Acrisius. This man's father impregnated his mother Danaë in the form of a golden shower. For 10 points, name this son of Zeus who married Andromeda and slew the gorgon Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 892 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Louisville B + Chicago A + Imperial A | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 32093

Question: Herodotus describes a temple dedicated to this figure built on the river Ilissus after this figure was invoked in a defeat of a Persian fleet. Pausanias' description of the chest of Cypselus unusually describes this figure as having snakes for feet. One of Avianus' renditions of Aesop's Fables describes this figure losing a bet with Phoebus when trying to force a traveler to remove his cloak. He is said to have fathered 12 (*) colts on the mares of Erichthonius, and in another story, he abducted a princess who later gave birth to the nymph Chione. He was the father of two men who saved Phineus from the Harpies during the Argonautica, named Calais and Zetes. For 10 points, name this personification of the North Wind.

ANSWER: Boreas

Result: 893 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Maryland A | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 32123

Question: In the Heimskringla, this god succeeds Odin as the leader of the Swedes after Odin's death; he eventually died, had himself marked for Odin using a spear, and was burned. Loki claims this god was urinated upon by the daughters of Hymir. In the Gylfaginning, this god was said to be called on by hunters and voyagers, and he was exchanged as a (*) hostage for Hoenir. After his marriage, this god spent half of the year in Thrymheim before deciding he did not like living in the mountains and hearing the cries of wolves, going back to his residence at Noatun. This god's wife chose him after only being able to look at his feet and mistaking him for Baldur. For 10 points, name this husband of Skadi, the Norse god of the winds and the sea.

ANSWER: Njord

Result: 894 | WIT | 2013 | Round: MCTC | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 32141

Question: In one appearance, he adopts the twenty-fourth son of the shepherd Custennin, a boy named Goreu. He slew nine witches atop Ystarfingun and defeated a child of Hen Wen that terrorized Anglesey. In Lancelot, the Knight of the Cart, this knight is the first to challenge Meleagant, who defeats him. However, this knight successfully slays Wrnach the Giant and (*) Palug's Cat. This first knight to come to Culhwch's assistance put Gareth to work as a kitchen boy and gave him the ironic nickname "Beaumains". Malory describes how he forgot his sword while riding to his first tournament, leading his squire to pull a sword from a stone while searching for a replacement. For 10 points, name this uncouth son of Sir Ector, the foster brother and seneschal to King Arthur.

ANSWER: Sir Kay [or Cai or Cei or Kex or Keu or, delightfully, Queux]

Result: 895 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Oxford + Michigan + Lawrence EDITED | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 32155

Question: In the Aeneid, Achaemenides recounts his encounter with this character. In one story, this character is the topic of a conversation between the sea nymph Doris and her sister. That sister, who is called a "milk white maid" by this figure in his love songs about her, later fell in love with the prince Acis, who was killed by this character. Although not (*) Pygmalion, he fell in love with a woman named Galatea. In a more famous appearance, this character returned to his home to find men eating his cheese. He implored his father Poseidon to curse a man he originally thought was named "Nobody," who escaped from this character by hiding under a flock of his sheep after blinding him. For 10 points, name this cyclops from the Odyssey.

ANSWER: Polyphemus

Result: 896 | WIT | 2013 | Round: Rice | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 32175

Question: The folklorist Richard Dorson demonstrated that this figure was invented from the whole cloth by Edward O'Reilly. During his courtship of one consort, he shot all but one of the stars from the sky for her, and, at her insistence, allowed her to ride his horse, which bucked her to the moon. This figure, who was said to have laughed himself to death, once created a (*) hurricane while wrestling and defeated the Bear Lake Monster. This husband of Slue-Foot Sue rode the horse Widowmaker, ate dynamite, was raised by coyotes, and used his lariat, a rattlesnake, to lasso a tornado which he used to carve out the Grand Canyon. For 10 points, identify this hero of American folklore, a legendary cowboy.

ANSWER: Pecos Bill [prompt on Bill]

Result: 897 | WIT | 2013 | Round: St. John's | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 32198

Question: This god wears a crown with two tall plumes and serves as the master of ceremonies of the Feast of the Tail when assuming the form of Tatenen. This deity wears the Atef crown and represents the necropolis of Saqqara when taking the form of Seker. The Shabaka Stone claims to detail the contents of a worm-ridden scroll about this deity. This deity fathered Nefertem and Maahes with his consort (*) Sekhmet and is also said to have fathered Imhotep. The bull god Apis served as this god's herald before this deity's identity was absorbed by Osiris. He is usually depicted as a mummified figure with green skin, and was syncretized by the Greeks with Hephaestus. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of craftsmen, the supreme god of Memphis.

ANSWER: ANSWER: Ptah [prompt on Osiris before mention, outright accept Tatenen and Seker before their respective mentions]

Result: 898 | WIT | 2013 | Round: St. John's | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 32212

Question: One of these individuals received a pair of divine earrings from a merchant, only to see them break. Another of them died in a forest fire, but not before founding the Ikshvaku dynasty, to which most of these figures belong; only two of them are members of the Harivamsa. They are usually depicted in the kayotsarga pose because many of them achieved (*) moksha while in that pose. Because they are free of kashayas, they have unlimited siddhis at their disposal. They include the gender-ambiguous Mallinath, and Rishabha, who was succeeded by a man who taught the five great vows of right conduct, including ahimsa. For 10 points, Mahavira is the last of what twenty-four "ford-makers" who help people achieve enlightenment in Jainism?

ANSWER: tirthankaras [or katavul; prompt on ford-makers before mention]

Result: 899 | WIT | 2013 | Round: UVA | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 32227

Question: The fairy Oberon gives Huon an enchanted one of these objects which is operated by the sign of the cross. A gold one that breaks apart in the presence of lies and is restored by truths is owned by Cormac mac Airt. Aegeus saves the life of a young Theseus by knocking one of these out of his hands. Following the advice of Tyr's mother, Thor wins a kettle from Hymir by breaking one of them against the giant's skull. The goddess (*) Hygiea is usually depicted holding a snake and one of them. One of them is owned by the Greek analogue of Juventas, who marries Heracles when he ascends to Olympus. Another of them is owned by a young boy abducted from Mount Ida by Zeus. For 10 points, name these objects used by Hebe and Ganymede to pour nectar for the gods.

ANSWER: cups [prompt on vessels and the like]

Result: 900 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Cornell | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 30542

Question: A battle at this place saw Capaneus struck by a thunderbolt after boasting that Zeus could not stop him from burning it. Two eventual conquerors of this city murdered their mother Eriphyle for accepting a bribe. Amphion and Zethus jointly ruled this city, whose first queen was transformed into a snake along with its founder and owned a cursed necklace. The Phoenician founder of this city had abandoned his search for Europa and followed a cow to this place before killing a dragon and sewing its teeth in the ground. For 10 points, name this city ruled by Cadmus and Oedipus.

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 901 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Dorman A | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 30563

Question: After undergoing this process, the wife of Amphion was whirlwind-ed back to her homeland of Sipylus, where she continued to cry a river of tears. One character from Norse mythology underwent this fate after identifying the sun as "Dvalin's Delight," and that dwarf, Alvis, had been a suitor to Thor's daughter. This occurred to a daughter of Tantalus, Niobe, after her children were shot down by Artemis and Apollo. Cassiopeia underwent this process at the hands of a hero who protected himself from it using a reflective shield. For 10 points, name this manner of death inflicted by looking at the head of Medusa or the eyes of a basilisk.

ANSWER: being turned into stone or petrification [or clear-knowledge equivalents]

Result: 902 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Florida | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 30585

Question: In Native American myth, one of these animals named Ictinkike served as a war god. In addition to foxes, the Shinto food god Inari often took this form in order to nudge people toward doing good deeds. Another of these animals once dropped a pot filled with the world's wisdom while trying to climb down a tree and in another story traded a python, a leopard, some hornets, and a dwarf to Nyame for all the world's stories. In Greek myth, one of these creatures was originally a woman who was punished for depicting stories of the love affairs of the gods during a weaving contest with Athena. For 10 points, name this eight-legged animal exemplified by Anansi and Arachne.

ANSWER: spiders

Result: 903 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Georgia Tech A | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 30618

Question: This god's association with disease led to confusion in interpreting this god's epithet Smintheus, and this god sent the plague that swept through the Greek camp when Agamemnon initially refused to return Chryseis to her father. This god killed some Cyclopes in retaliation for the death of his son with Coronis, who had been struck down by Zeus for trying to raise Hippolytus from the dead. After mocking Eros' arrows, this god fell in love with the daughter of Peneus and pursued her until she turned into a laurel tree. For 10 points, name this figure who fathered Asclepius and pursued the nymph Daphne, the Greek god of prophecy, light, and music.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 904 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Georgia Tech B | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 30675

Question: 5.	He's not Gawain, but this man once defeated Loegere and Conall for the Champion's Portion in a beheading contest related in the story of Bricriu's Feast. Riastarthae is the name given to this man's intense battle fury, which causes his tricolored hair to start bleeding. While in Scotland, he was taught by Scathach to use a barbed spear called the gae bulg, which he later used to kill his friend Ferdiad. This man was frequently opposed by the Morrigan while leading an army against the forces of Queen Medb of Connacht during the Cattle Raid of Cooley. For 10 points, name this man originally called Setanta, the hero of the Ulster Cycle.

ANSWER: Cu Chulainn [or Setanta before it is read]

Result: 905 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Hunter | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 30708

Question: This figure's son Medus was born after she married Aegeus, and Theseus was saved from drinking poisoned wine offered by her after Aegeus recognized the sword on his belt. Alcestis was the only member of a group of sisters who refused to place their father in a boiling cauldron at the suggestion of this woman. This figure chopped up her brother Apsyrtus and threw the pieces into the sea, and later she murdered her own children to save them from the Corinthians, who were angry at her for killing Glauce with a poisoned robe. For 10 points, name this sorceress of Colchis who helped Jason steal the Golden Fleece from her father Aeetes.

ANSWER: Medea

Result: 906 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Illinois A | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 30761

Question: Herodotus writes that a group of these people broke free of captivity at sea, but ran aground in the land of the Scythians because they did not know how to sail. One of these figures was born to Otrere and Ares and slew Machaon during the Trojan War, and Thersites insulted Achilles when he felt regret for killing that figure, Penthesileia. Theseus had to ward off their invasion of Attica. During one of his labors, Heracles was tasked with fetching the girdle of one of these people named Hippolyta. For 10 points, name this tribe of warrior women.

ANSWER: Amazons

Result: 907 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Machiavelli | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 30839

Question: One of this figure's followers named Taygete was changed into a doe after she was raped by Zeus, and Buphagus was killed for thinking about raping this goddess. This figure changed Meleager's sisters into guinea fowl after his death and rescued Iphigenia from being sacrificed at Aulis. Because Oeneus failed to sacrifice to this goddess, she sent the Calydonian Boar to ravage his lands. This goddess was bathing on Mt. Cithaeron when a hunter stumbled in on her, for which she punished him by changing him into a deer and having him eaten by his own hounds. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of the hunt and the moon, a daughter of Leto and twin sister of Apollo.

ANSWER: Artemis [or Diana]

Result: 908 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Michigan A | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 30857

Question: This figure set Sir Balin's sword afloat in a river until it returned to Camelot for Sir Galahad. The dragon episode of the Welsh tale Lludd and Llefelys echoes an episode from this figure's childhood, in which he discovered a white and a red dragon battling underground at the location where Vortigern was attempting to build a wall. His death came about after Vivian, the Lady of the Lake, used her magic to bury him alive. He may be responsible for the construction of the Round Table and bore away Uther Pendragon's son as soon as he was born. For 10 points, name this advisor to King Arthur, a famous magician.

ANSWER: Merlin

Result: 909 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: UCSD A | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 30873

Question: Telamon built an altar to his companion after being the first to scale this city's walls in order to avoid that ally's jealous anger. After this city's people tried to sacrifice Hesione to a troublesome sea monster, it was destroyed by Heracles. The Scaean Gate formed the largest opening in this location's walls, while the plain outside it housed the Tomb of Ilus, its founder, who was also the recipient of the Palladium. It was protected by allies like Sarpedon when warriors like Menelaus and Diomedes led an army against it during a 10-year siege. For 10 points, name this place home to Antenor, Aeneas, Priam, and a giant wooden horse.

ANSWER: Troy [or Ilium]

Result: 910 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: UNC | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 30887

Question: This god broke the backs of two giants who pushed from under his chair and tried to crush him against the ceiling. The sorceress Groa momentarily stopped chanting while healing this god and left a whetstone stuck in his forehead. This god's goats had the ability to regenerate themselves after they were eaten. To get a possession back from Thrym, he once cross-dressed as the goddess Freya. Thialfi was a companion of this god, who wore a belt that doubled his strength and was married to a golden-haired goddess named Sif. For 10 points, name this hammer-wielding Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 911 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Washington | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 30940

Question: In Irish myth, the sorceress Aife was transformed into one of these animals by Bodb after she turned the children of Llyr into these out of jealousy. Regin's plot to kill Sigurd was thwarted when Sigurd tasted blood and understood the speech of these animals. In the Arabian Nights, some of them that destroy Sinbad's ship with boulders are called rocs. Hercules used a magic rattle to scare away some of these creatures in Lake Stymphalia, and one of them ate Prometheus' liver every day. For 10 points, name this type of animal that included one that was born again from its ashes, the Phoenix.

ANSWER: birds [Accept swans until "speech of these" and accept eagles after "Prometheus."]

Result: 912 | ACF Fall | 2012 | Round: Yale A | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 30968

Question: The Skaldskaparmal includes in this group the goddess Eir, a figure with healing powers. One of these beings disobeyed Odin by letting King Agnar win a battle and argued with Gudrun over whose spouse was better. These figures, whose armor causes the aurora borealis, served the einherjar. The most famous of these figures died when she threw herself onto her lover's funeral pyre, and was previously condemned to slumber in a ring of fire until she was saved by Sigurd. For 10 points, name these beings exemplified by Brynhild, warrior women who rode down in battle to carry slain heroes to Valhalla.

ANSWER: valkyries [Prompt on shield-maidens or swan-maidens.]

Result: 913 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: ColumbiaChicagos | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 43450

Question: When this figure raped his own great-granddaughter, his consort removed the sperm from the girl's womb and planted it in a swamp, where a tree grew. After the servant Isimud tricked him into eating the tree's fruit, this figure became pregnant himself; Abu and Dazimua were two of the resulting children. In response to the pleas of Ninsikil, this figure made the land of Dilmun arable. Represented by the number 40 and sometimes depicted as a double-coiled snake, he was known as the lord of semen. After incapacitating Apsu by putting him into a deathlike sleep, this deity took over Apsu's realm; subsequently, this deity's son killed Apsu's consort, Tiamat. He was this patron deity of the city of Eridu. For 10 points, name the Sumerian god of handicrafts and water who was the consort of Ninhursag and father of Marduk.

ANSWER: Enki [or Ea]

Result: 914 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Editors 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 44158

Question: A group of these creatures known as the Anigrides were believed to cure skin diseases, and subgroups of these entities include Eleionomae, the Crinaeae, and the Avernales. The earliest known reference to one of these creatures concerns one of them named Abarbaree, the lover of Boukolion. Euneicha, Malis, and Nycheia, three of these creatures who lived in Bithynia, caused Heracles to grieve when they kidnapped or drowned Hylas. Another of these creatures lived in the woods near Caria and joined her body to that of Hermaphroditus when he swam in her pool; she was Salmacis. Some of these figures were daughters of Achelous or of other river gods, and they were thought to die when their ponds or springs dried up. For 10 points, name these divinities of fresh water, who along with nereids and oceanids comprise the water nymphs.

ANSWER: naiads [prompt on nymph, prompt on water nymph or water goddess or equivalents, do not accept nereid or oceanid]

Result: 915 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Editors 2 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 44204

Question: In Babylonian mythology, rising from the pit of Nanshe was intended to symbolize this action, which is also performed by a rust-red rooster that crows alongside Fjalar and Gullinkambi to achieve this effect at Ragnarok. Zhongli Quan accomplished this action using his magical fan. When threatened with the loss of Nergal, Ereshkigal threatens to perform this action en masse. The cauldron Matholwch receives from Bran could perform this action, giving him an advantage in his battle against Bran until Efnisien jumped into it and destroyed it. Biblical beneficiaries of this act include Tabitha and the Shulamite woman's son, and Thokk's actions prevented this from happening to Baldur. For accepting gold for performing this action upon Hippolytus, Asclepius was killed by Zeus's thunderbolt. For 10 points, name this action that Jesus performed upon Lazarus.

ANSWER: resurrecting the dead [accept equivalents like bringing people back to life]

Result: 916 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Editors 3 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 44268

Question: One hymn praising this deity compares him to the brilliance of a million suns, while another hymn praising this deity describes the author of the Dasbodh waiting for this deity's arrival. The latter hymn refers to the yellow garment often worn by this deity in various depictions, and a longer work honoring this God calls him the manifestation of "tat tvam asi." One pilgrimage performed to honor this deity involves visiting eight temples, six of which are located around the city of Pune. A festival celebrating this God occurs in the month of Bhadrapada, and ends with immersing idols of him in water. Those idols often include the offering of a modaka, a prominent organ which is curved toward the offering, and his mount, the tiny mouse Mooshakha. For 10 points, identify this "God of good beginnings," whose Elephant head is often praised in several hymns.

ANSWER: Ganesha [accept Ganapati or Vinayaka or Lambodara or Gajanana]

Result: 917 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Editors 4 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 44285

Question: Some sources consider this figure to be the "nameless god" who rules in Gimle because Gimle is situated near or within his realm. His son Glaur is the husband of the sun maiden Sol. His weapon is referred to as "scathe of branches" or "switch-harm". Sinmara is thought to be the wife of Mimir or this figure. Lif and Lifthrasir survive the disaster wrought by this god. Like Heimdall, he acts as a watchman, and this figure will carry his flaming sword when he musters his troops, including Garm and Fenris, at Vigrid. There, he will defeat his enemy because that enemy had lost his sword while wooing Gerda. For 10 points, name this ruler of Muspellheim and leader of the fire giants who will kill Frey during Ragnarok.

ANSWER: Surtr

Result: 918 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Editors 5 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 44332

Question: This figure turned a group of peasants into frogs after they muddied a pond's waters to deny her a drink, and earlier that figure had been led by a group of wolves to the land of Tremilis. One of her epithets is "of the golden spindle", and she is sometimes called "Phytia", or "the grafter", because she "grafted" male genitalia onto Galatea's daughter, who became the boy Leucippus. Like Asteria, she was the daughter of Coeus. Dione, Rhea, Themis, and Amphitrite help her by offering a immense gold necklace as a bribe for Eileithyia to ignore Hera's injunction against relieving this woman's suffering. Chloris survived a massacre by praying to this woman, but Chloris's siblings, the children of Niobe, were killed by this woman's children after Niobe disparaged this woman for having only two children. While wandering the earth, she was harassed by Python, who was killed by this woman's son. For 10 points, name this mother of Apollo and Artemis.

ANSWER: Leto

Result: 919 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Editors 6 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 44349

Question: Libon of Elis designed a temple to this god whose east pediment depicts the chariot race between Oinomaos and Pelops. Athletes caught cheating at the Olympics paid fines that were used to construct bronze statues of this god called zanes. Alexander the Great's silver tetradrachm coins depict the head of Heracles on one side and this god on the other side. Lysippus sculpted a sixty foot tall statue of this god for Tarentum, and the Artemision Bronze is thought to depict either this god or Poseidon. A statue of this god was the model of Horatio Greenough's statue of George Washington. He was usually depicted with an eagle and a scepter, such as in the massive gold and ivory statue sculpted by Phidias for his temple at Olympia. For 10 points, name this Greek god, who was often depicted in the act of throwing his lightning bolts.

ANSWER: Zeus

Result: 920 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Editors 6 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 44358

Question: Because he copulated with his shadow, he is sometimes said to be self-created, although other accounts hold that he is a child of the watery deep. The earth is said to be made of this god's spittle. His physical form is similar to that of Harakhtes. This figure is invoked to protect against extreme fear of putrefaction in the Book of the Dead. He is sometimes depicted as the central figure of a group in a boat being held aloft by Nun. This figure rises from the sacred mound of Benu in Heliopolis in a syncretistic form with Atum. In the myth "The True Name of Ra", this figure is revealed to be the sun at dawn, but elsewhere he is depicted as the creature who the sun across the sky every day like a giant ball of dung. For 10 points, name this god who is usually depicted with the head of a scarab beetle.

ANSWER: Khepri

Result: 921 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Editors 7 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 44529

Question: In a myth that describes a compact this figure made with some swans to sing a dirge, he is described as "the god of wayside inns". Iris visits this figure's house when the funeral pyre of Patroclus fails to light and finds him feasting with his family. With Iris, he is sometimes considered the father of Pothos or Eros. This figure conveyed Psyche to Cupid's palace. His wife Chloris bore him a son named Carpus who was the god of fruit. With Podarge, a harpy, he was the father of Xanthus and Balias, the immortal horses of Apollo. In a fit of jealousy, this figure caused Apollo's discus to kill Hyacinthus. He was known as the gentlest of his brothers. For 10 points, name this sibling of Notus, Eurus, and Boreas, the Greek personification of the west wind.

ANSWER: Zephyrus [prompt on the west wind before mentioned]

Result: 922 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Editors 8 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 44564

Question: In one tale, this figure looses his dog to kill a horde of venomous sheep that had cornered a king in a tree; in return, this figure slept with that king's wife and fathered a son who would later marry Duv Laca, Mongan. One daughter of this figure was Cliodna, who had left with her lover Keevan but was swept back home by this figure while she slept. Another of this figure's daughters instructed her lover to stay on a horse after he left Tir na Nog, but his disobedience led to his sudden aging. That daughter of this figure was Niamh, lover of Oisin. In another story, this figure's wife left him for another man, but relinquished him when his wife Emer came looking for him. This figure then shook a cloak between his wife Fand and that man, Cuchulainn, to ensure they never meet again. This figure owns the horse Enbarr which can travel over water, and passed his sword Fragarach to his foster son Lugh. For 10 points, name this Irish god associated with the Isle of Man, the son of the sea god Lir.

ANSWER: Manannan mac Lir

Result: 923 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 44781

Question: This man's attempt to use a boundary stone as a weapon failed when he could not throw it far enough. In a dream, this figure received a visitor disguised as Calybe who threw a firebrand at him. His attempts to burn some ships are foiled when, at Cybele's request, the ships turn into nymphs. This figure's sister disguised herself as Metiscus in an attempt to save this man's life, but when he recognizes her driving his chariot, she stops trying to drive this man away from his opponent. In an earlier adventure, that man had escaped from his enemies by floating down the Tiber to safety. This man's allies include Mezentius, Camilla, and his would-be mother-in-law Amata. The sight of Pallas's sword belt around this man's waist causes his rival to kill him in a rage; that rival goes on to marry this man's former betrothed, Lavinia. For 10 points, name this king of the Rutuli and brother of Juturna who is killed by Aeneas.

ANSWER: Turnus

Result: 924 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 44838

Question: One resident of this locale owns a bunch of toads who serve him as kitchen helpers. One of its other denizens is a giant worm with boiling saliva. In its south resides a woman called the acihuat, who is sometimes likened to the llorona or "weeping woman". Another figure dwelling in this realm, the ehecatagat or lord of winds, helps search for new residents to populate it. The physically handicapped were escorted to this location by Xolotl in his role as psychopomp. All those who die of gout or scabies end up in this place, which is presided over by Chalchihuitlicue and her consort, its namesake. For 10 points, name the Aztec hell, which, unlike Mictlan, receives the souls of the drowned and is named for the rain god who rules it.

ANSWER: Tlalocan [or Tlaloc's realm; or Tlaloc's hell]

Result: 925 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Harvard | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 44912

Question: Along with her husband, this goddess ruled in the period before that of the nine akhu. The eightieth spell of the Coffin Texts identifies this figure as the favorite child of the Creator, who is instructed by the water goddess Nun to place this figure at his nose "so that your heart may live," after creating this goddess from Tefnut. Similarly, as the beloved daughter of Ra this figure traveled with him in the solar barque and gave "life to his nostrils." This goddess had a pair of wings with which she could revive the dead by beating the air around her, and she was often symbolized by a plinth. In this figure's most prominent role, 42 confessions were offered to her servants, after which this goddess sent a dead soul to Aaru to live with Ra or devoured by the monster Ammit. That decision was made by weighing the soul against an ostrich feather, which symbolized this goddess. For 10 points, name this wife of Thoth, the Egyptian goddess of truth, order, and justice.

ANSWER: Ma'at

Result: 926 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: IllinoisDartmouthGMU | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 44886

Question: A son of Deucalion whose dog gave birth to a piece of wood, Orestheus, is associated with this substance alongside his brother Amphictyon. The use of this by Jason's Lemnian love-child Euneus aided Greek efforts in the Trojan War. Along with "myrtle", this was one of the words that could not be uttered during the festival rites of Bona Dea. Paris used this substance to write the message "I love you Helen" on a table. Oenopion leveraged this substance to avenge the rape of Merope by Orion, though he could not prevent the death of Icarius by shepherds who benefited from this substance. A person disguised as Oudeis or "nobody" kept the priest Maro alive and used Maro's gift of this to subdue a son of Poseidon. For 10 points, name this substance that Silenus and Maenads often abuse, a substance that lulled Polyphemus to sleep and is the chief object associated with Dionysus.

ANSWER: wine [or alcohol]

Result: 927 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Michigan, Carleton, and Rice | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 45049

Question: The son of this figure won a five year supply of iron after winning a game after the death of Patroclus which involved throwing a piece of metal or rope at a spike in the ground. That son, Polypoetes, was also present at the burial of Calchas. His sister, Physadeia, became a handmaiden to Helen after she was captured by the Dioscuri and taken back to Sparta. This man encountered Theseus when he attempted to steal his cattle at Marathon, but became so impressed by him that they became friends. His ally Cymelus perished at his wedding, which saw Caeneus, originally a girl who Poseidon turned into a brave warrior, prove nearly invulnerable until he was crushed with rocks and tree trunks. That event also saw Theseus cut off the ears of Eurytion, and at some point this man was married to Hippodamia. Heracles was unable to free this man, whose attempt to steal the wife of a god was too serious a crime to go unpunished. For 10 points, name this king of Thessaly who attempted to steal the wife of Hades.

ANSWER: Pirithous

Result: 928 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Minnesota | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 29716

Question: One of this man's daughters was put to death alongside her son Munippus when a prophecy of Aesacus was determined by royal fiat to refer to them. Homer related the story of this man's affair with the nymph Calybe, which produced his illegitimate son Bucolion. One of his sons saved his own life by giving his potential murderer a golden veil, an act which led that son of this man to adopt a name meaning "to buy" to replace his old name, Podarces. This man, along with almost all of his family, was slaughtered after he refused to give several divine horses to Heracles, who in exchange had saved this man's daughter Hesione from a sea monster. That monster was sent to exact payment for another of this man's broken promises, namely his refusal to reward Apollo and Poseidon for building the walls of his city. For 10 points, identify this son of Ilus who preceded his own son Priam as King of Troy.

ANSWER: Laomedon

Result: 929 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: NorthwesternUSC | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 45017

Question: This goddess turns her husband's bed over before every sunrise so that he sees her favorite subjects first in the morning. In one myth, this figure stole the gold off of a statue of her husband and then cheated on him, causing her husband to go into exile. In a bet with her husband, this figure sends a servant to warn King Geirrod that a magician is coming. Syn protected the doors of the hall of this figure, and she calls on Hlin to protect certain people. One of this figure's servants rides a horse that can cross oceans, Hofvarpnir, while another carries around her shoes and ashbox. In addition to being served by Gna and Fulla, this figure spins clouds on a loom from her home Fensalir. This goddess made all living things swear they would not harm her son, but that didn't protect this goddess's son from mistletoe. For 10 points, name this Norse queen of Asgard and wife of Odin who was distraught over the death of her son Balder.

ANSWER: Frigg

Result: 930 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Ohio State | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 45105

Question: In one form, this figure turned into an eel, wolf, and a red cow to distract a hero but was wounded each time. However, that hero would eventually heal this figure after exchanging a blessing for a drink of milk. This figure promised to take the blood and kidneys out of Indech and give them to the winners of the Second Battle of Mag Tuireadh. Badb, Macha, and Nemain are the three aspects of this figure. She often appears washing the clothes of those who will die. She disguised herself as a hag and offered her opponent a dish of dog meat to force him into breaking his vows. Her croak-like cry may have inspired the legend of the banshee. This woman weakened Cuchulainn enough to eventually cause his death, and she is usually depicted as the goddess of war and death. For 10 points, name this Irish figure, who is often depicted as a crow.

ANSWER: the Morrigan

Result: 931 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: PennRutgersYaleB | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 45070

Question: This man's daughter married Amergin of the Iron Jaw and was named Findochem. One of this figure's sons, whom he once saved from a river, was born at the feast of Othar after gestating for three years and three months. This man met his wife after his band of 27 warriors killed her family and he stood between her and her weapons as she was bathing. He once proclaimed that anyone who took up arms upon a particular day would be famous and short-lived. This man slept between Emer and her husband on their wedding night, and after hearing her cry in the womb, he predicted that the daughter of Fedlimid would bring great sorrow to everyone. In addition to foreseeing the fate of Deirdre of the Sorrows, he also renamed Setanta after the death of a dog belonging to Culainn. For 10 points, name this ally to Cuchulainn, the court druid of Connor Mac Nessa in the Ulster cycle.

ANSWER: Cathbad

Result: 932 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: PennRutgersYaleB | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 45086

Question: One of these figures co-founded the city of Mallos in Karia with Mopsos, though the two of them slew one another when they fought over the kingship. The murder of another of these figures was avenged by his sons, Akarnan and Amphoteros, after their mother asked Zeus that they age prematurely to kill Agenor and Pronoos, Phegeus's sons. Another of these men was slain on the expedition to Troy by the Mysian king when the Greeks accidentally attacked the kingdom of Telephos. That figure, Thersandros, followed in the footsteps of his father by bribing Eriphyle with the robe of Harmonia, a fact for which she was murdered by her son. The tomb of the most famous of these figures was tended by birds who were said to be the descendents of his crew, and that figure crushed Aeneas's hip with a large stone, before later injuring both Aphrodite and Ares. For 10 points, name this group, who included Alkmaion and Diomedes and who completed the work of their fathers by taking a Boeotian city for Polyneikes's son.

ANSWER: Epigonoi [or Sons of the Seven Against Thebes; do not accept or prompt on "Seven Against Thebes"]

Result: 933 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: UCSD | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 45226

Question: He hid in a hollow reed after the deaths of his three older brothers, who shared his name and occupation, but after being betrayed by a frog he agreed to come out of hiding and was granted immortality and eternal youth. One of his titles is "sharp as a needle". In early accounts, it is this figure, rather than Yama, who escorts souls to Svarga. In some accounts, a curse placed upon this figure when he failed to take care of Puloma, the wife of Bhrigu, forms the origin of the feast of Holi. According to the Mahabharata, he fathers a child on Svaha when she impersonates the wives of the Seven Sages, although in other texts Shiva is identified as the father of that child, Kartikkeya. The Rig Veda opens with a hymn to this figure. This god is sometimes depicted with a buttery face and seven tongues, and he is the "food-eater" of the gods; these aspects are parts of his role as the god of the sacrifice. For 10 points, name this Hindu god of fire.

ANSWER: Agni

Result: 934 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: VCUAlabamaWUSTL | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 45423

Question: When this figure asked the name of his killer, that killer claimed to be called "a noble beast," and said that he had neither father nor mother, in order to avoid a dying curse. One of this character's brothers was killed after drinking this character's blood. His other brother was accidentally killed by Loki; his father demanded a ransom of enough gold to cover that brother's skin. A curse placed on that ransom by the dwarf Andvari led this figure to murder his father, after which he hoarded the cursed treasure and became "the worst of all worms." This figure was betrayed by his brother, who reforged the sword used to slay him; that sword was called Gram. For 10 points, identify this son of Hreidmar and brother of Otr and Regin, a dragon who was killed by Sigurd.

ANSWER: Fafnir [or Fraenir]

Result: 935 | ACF Nationals | 2012 | Round: Yale | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 45335

Question: One goddess who sometimes appeared as this animal was born from an egg hatched by doves; that goddess, Atargatis, is sometimes thought to be the mother of Semiramis. The Polynesian god Tangaroa originally created humans in this image. The Ammonite princess Naamah found an item that Asmodeus had stolen inside one of these creatures in a story that echoes the episode of Dushyanta's ring in The Recognition of Shakuntala. Manu saved one of these creatures before realizing that it was Matsya, an avatar of Vishnu. Dagon was often depicted as being half this creature. One of these creatures named Fintan feasted on hazelnuts before being consumed by Finn mac Cool, resulted in Finn's acquisition of this creature's wisdom. For 10 points, name this type of animal form which forms the lower half of the bodies of Glaucus and Triton.

ANSWER: fish [or mermaids or merman or equivalents; or salmon]

Result: 936 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Alabama + Yale C + Alberta | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 29766

Question: This man comes across a boy bearing a bag of seeds, which he plants across the land until a particularly large oak blots out the sun. This man was born seven-hundred thirty years after he was conceived in the womb of the primal Maiden of Air, who had been impregnated by the waves of the sea after eating a berry. This man suffered a self-inflicted axe wound trying to make a boat from a girl's spindle. This man slew a great pike and fashioned its jawbone into the first kantele. He is offered the hand of a witch's daughter if he could convince the eternal hammerer to build a bountiful world pillar; when the task is done, he and Ilmarinen decided to take it back, but while fighting Louhi the Sampo falls to the ocean floor. For 10 points, name this accomplished bard, the main character of the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Vainamoinen

Result: 937 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Harvard + Rice A | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 29786

Question: After being picked up and thrown to the ground by this figure, one of his enemies vomits blood and is granted mercy. This figure once slashed the face of the moon because it laughed when a snake frightened his mount, throwing him to the ground and causing the food in his stomach to spill out. This figure walked around his parents three times in order to win a race around the world, because according to him, his parents were the world. This husband of Siddhi and Buddhi rode on a mouse and suffered an injury inflicted by his uncle Sani, although in another account it was his father who attacked him with his third eye for preventing entry into a room where his mother was taking a bath. For 10 points, name this Hindu remover of obstacles, the son of Parvati to whom Brahma gave an elephant's head to replace his own severed one.

ANSWER: Ganesha

Result: 938 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Maryland A + Chicago B | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 29799

Question: In the Aeneid, this figure disappears after inciting the Trojan women to burn a bunch of unattended ships. In one myth, this figure takes an oath by the Styx such that Phineus would not be molested by the harpies. An offering of cakes made of wheat, honey, and dried figs was offered by Delians on Hecate to this twin sister of Arke, who encouraged Achilles to go to the battlement and show himself to both opposing armies such that the Trojans might be afraid and the Argives inspired. Although initially considered a virgin figure, this figure was later betrothed to Zephyrus. Her wings were once torn and given to Thetis for her wedding. Her role often overlaps with that of Hebe, the cupbearer, and causes her to leave behind a rainbow. For 10 points, name this messenger of the Greek gods.

ANSWER: Iris

Result: 939 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Maryland B + Loyola | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 29835

Question: The wife of one figure with this name cheated on him with Comethes. That figure killed the charioteer Eniopeus shortly before literally stabbing Agelaos in the back. Abderus was killed during a quest to kill another figure with this name, who ruled the Bistonian people of Thrace. This hero spared the life of Bellerophon's grandson, Glaukos, and traded armor with him. This hero intervened in a coup against his grandfather Oeneus, King of Calydon, but did not bear a grudge against the perpetrator of that coup, Thersites. Prior to his most famous deed, he knocked Aeneas off his chariot and crushed his hipbone with a stone. For 10 points, name this son of Tydeus, a Homeric hero who wounded Aphrodite and Ares during his Aristeia and shared his name with the owner of four flesh-eating mares.

ANSWER: Diomedes

Result: 940 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Michigan A + George Mason | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 29850

Question: These animals were known as ko'ko and could communicate with the dead in Hopi mythology. Romans believed that witches transformed into these animals to suck the blood of babies and that dreams in which they appeared portended robbery or shipwreck; such a fate could be avoided by killing one of these animals and nailing it to a door.. In Greek myth, after tattling on Persephone for having eaten a pomegranate in Hades, Ascalaphus was transformed into one of these birds, one of which was the mount of Lakshmi. Perhaps a better Greek example though would be Glaucus, the so-called "little" one that became Athena's favorite pet. For 10 points, name these nocturnal birds whose pellets you probably dissected in first grade, which come in "barn" and "screech" varieties.

ANSWER: owls [accept any specific variety; prompt on birds until mentioned]

Result: 941 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Minnesota A | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 29864

Question: This man held off an ambush by a king's army and killed every soldier, making the king grant him half the kingdom and marriage to his daughter Philonoe. The women of Xanthis lifted their skirts at this man in order to persuade him to call off a flood. His most prized possession was obtained either at the never-failing well of Pirene or after a night spent praying at the altar of Athena. Iobates gave him deadly tasks because Proteus accused him of seducing his wife Stheneboea. This man spent his final days on the Plain of Aleion as a roaming, blinded hermit after Zeus sent a gad-fly to prevent him from reaching Mount Olympus. He slew a monster with the body of a goat and the head of a lion by using a golden bridle to tame a flying horse. For 10 points, name this hero who used Pegasus to slay the monstrous Chimera.

ANSWER: Bellerophontes

Result: 942 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: MIT A | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 29888

Question: This god was thought to store large stockpiles of treasure in mountain caves, which might explain why a shrine for him was called the "mountain abode." Frost, disease, and the end of the world were three consequences of breaking the jugs possessed by this god, whose second wife was a river goddess named for her jade skirt. After his first wife was abducted, he brought forth a fiery deluge in his anger, destroying the Third Sun which he governed. Those who had been struck by lightning or drowned were destined for this god's paradise and were buried rather than cremated. This husband of Chalchiutlicue had a blue-and-white-painted sanctuary at the Great Temple in Tenochtitlan,where he received child sacrifices in exchange for the phenomenon he presided over. For 10 points, name this Aztec god of rain.

ANSWER: Tlaloc

Result: 943 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Northwestern A | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 29921

Question: This god was once overcome by the kindness shown by a poor man, so he instructed the man to hang a plaited straw rope across his home's entrance to protect against the plague. The incessant wailing of this god soon after birth caused rivers to dry up and his beard to grow long. This god gave birth to three daughters and two sons by biting beads off a necklace. This god filled rooms with scorpions, snakes, and centipedes and made his daughter's suitor spend a night in each. This father-in-law of Okuni-nushi commanded an elderly couple to distill sake so he could get an eight-headed dragon drunk and marry Kushinada-hime. This slayer of Orochi threw a flayed horse at the weaving servants of another goddess, causing her to flee into a cave. For 10 points, name this Shinto storm god and brother of Amaterasu.

ANSWER: Susano'o [or His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness]

Result: 944 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Penn A | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 29932

Question: After the death of Actaeon, this figure created an image of Actaeon in order to sooth his hounds. The constellation of the Horse is actually this god's daughter Thea, who hid from him in a forest after being impregnated by Aeolus. His daughter Onchyrroe foretold the manner of his death.This figure was conceived while Cronus was wandering the earth looking for Zeus and decided to mate with Philyra. Another story about this figure says that he was standing behind Elatus when he was shot by an arrow dipped in Hydra blood. He renounced his immortality so that he could be killed instead of Prometheus and was given the baby Asclepius to raise by Apollo, whom he taught the healing arts. For 10 points, name this tutor of Ajax, Aeneas, Achilles, and many other heroes, a wise centaur.

ANSWER: Chiron

Result: 945 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: RPI | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 29953

Question: This deity was once lodged by a poor woman after a noblewoman slammed her front door upon seeing her entourage, but she nonetheless cured the noblewoman's son, the victim of this deity's servants. She breathed a sweet perfume onto the maidservants of a queen, who unwittingly interrupted this goddess's ritual to make the queen's son immortal by thrusting him into a pile of burning logs. Lychnapsia commemorated the time this goddess spent in darkness with torchlight looking for her husband, who got stuck in a cedar tree in the kingdom of Byblos. Thanks to a passing fish, this goddess had to fashion a golden phallus as a replacement for the fourteenth piece of her husband's body. For 10 points, name this goddess who used a snake to coax Ra to reveal his secret name and reassembled her husband Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis [or Aset]

Result: 946 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Seven Lakes + Rockefeller | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 29986

Question: This group offers an enemy a crimson robe that had earlier been gifted to their leader, who sneaks behind him and kills him. One member of this group is told by his lover that he should throw the clod of earth he carries with him into the sea, so that it becomes an island. They fight earth-born monsters with six arms known as the Gegenees, whom they are later mistaken for once they return to the palace of King Cyzicus. A stray feather hurts one of these figures, who beat their shields with their swords to frighten the Stymphalian birds. They sleep with the foul-smelling women of Lemnos, led by Hypsipyle. They send a dove to clear a set of gnashing rocks known as the Sympaglades on their way to Colchis to retrieve the Golden Fleece. For 10 points, name this set of adventurers led by Jason, the crew of a namesake ship.

ANSWER: Argonauts [or Minyans]

Result: 947 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: South Carolina + Carleton A | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 29995

Question: This possessor of Harpirma and Psylla, two "wind-like" mares, had a shrine dedicated to him by Heracles at Olympia and once won the throne of Pisa. In a manner similar to the story of Ganymede, Poseidon once fell in love with this figure and took him to Olympus, but he was returned to earth for his father's crimes. He once plunged all of Greece into a drought by inviting the Arcadian king Stymphalus to a friendly debate and then hacking him into pieces. Bronze lynchpins were replaced with wax ones by Myrtilus, whom this figure bribed so that he could win the hand of Oenemaus's daughter Hippodamia in a chariot race. This figure was put into a cauldron and revived by Demeter, who fitted him with an ivory shoulder to replace the one that she had unwittingly eaten. For 10 points, name this son of Tantalus who was chopped up and served in a meal for the gods.

ANSWER: Pelops

Result: 948 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: VCU + Michigan State | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 30017

Question: This figure warned the Telchines to escape overseas after they provoked the wrath of the gods. The agoge of Sparta bestowed wreaths upon children who could survive being whipped during a cheese-stealing ritual at this deity's altar. This deity and her servants covered their faces with white clay so that she could elude and mock the lovesick Alpheus. She was tricked into attacking the head of Candaon, whom she cast in the sky, forever doomed to be chased by a scorpion. This goddess changed Arcas into a bear after Zeus seduced his mother, Callisto. After being spied naked in her bath by Actaeon, she turned his dogs against him. This goddess avenged an insult to her mother by killing the daughters of Niobe. For 10 points, name this daughter of Leto, the goddess of the hunt and twin sister of Apollo.

ANSWER: Artemis [accept Diana]

Result: 949 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Virginia + Dartmouth | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 30037

Question: In Chinese myth, one figure of this type was beaten to death with a club by his jealous student Feng Meng and murdered the river god Ho Po to steal his beautiful wife. The Queen Mother of the West gave one man in this occupation a drug of immortality, which his wife stole, becoming the moon goddess Chang'e. In Greek myth, a warrior of this type was left on Lemnos due to a festering wound from a snakebite. In Chinese myth, they include Hou Yi, who saved the world by destroying nine of the ten suns. In Greek myth, Philoctetes was this type of warrior, as was the god who obtained the Oracle of Delphi by killing Python. For 10 points, name these mythical figures including Apollo and Artemis, who all used a bow and arrow.

ANSWER: archers [prompt on warriors; prompt on soldiers]

Result: 950 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Wellesley + Hunter | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 30054

Question: This man's son-in law was the first Greek to land on the shore of Troy, which led to his death according to an oracle's prophecy and to the suicide of this man's daughter Polydora. Medusa and this man were the only ghosts to not flee before Heracles in the underworld; in that encounter, Heracles asked this man if he could marry his sister Deianira. After his death, his wife Cleopatra Alcyone died from grief and several of his sisters wept so much that they transformed into guineafowl. Because this man killed his relatives Plexippus and Toxeus, the Furies instructed this figure's mother Althaea to throw a cursed brand into the fire, killing him as it burned. Renowned for leading the hunt of an animal sacred to Artemis, for 10 points, name this Greek hero who loved Atalanta and who slew the Calydonian boar.

ANSWER: Meleager

Result: 951 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Yale A | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 30078

Question: An oracle prophesied that Orion's sight would be restored if he pointed his eye sockets toward this god, who eventually did restore his sight. After receiving an arrow and an apology from Heracles, this figure granted him the use of a golden cup, used to reach the island of the Hesperides. By the Oceanid Perse, this figure was the father of Pasiphae and Circe. This god snooped outside of the Thracian palace of Ares and witnessed Ares's extended liaison with Aphrodite, which he reported to Hephaestus. Tiresias warned a man who sacrificed a ram in the Underworld to avoid the cattle sacred to this figure. In his most famous story, to prove his paternity, he agreed to grant his son anything, which led to Phaethon's death when he failed to control the chariot for which this god was responsible. For 10 points, name this Greek personification of the Sun.

ANSWER: Helios [or Helius]

Result: 952 | ACF Regionals | 2012 | Round: Yale B + Bellarmine | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 30094

Question: The cult of this non-Allah god uniquely considered the pig to be a taboo, which some scholars regard as a basis for the ban of pork consumption in Judaism. The identity of the animal representation of this god is widely disputed -- exotic candidates include okapis, aardvarks, and greyhounds. This god transforms into a hippopotamus to sink his rival's boat, which is made of pine painted to look like stone, after losing his own boat, which is just made of stone. This god's plan to sexually assault his rival is foiled after his own semen gets spread out on his favorite food, lettuce, and fed to him. This god, who is depicted pointing a spear at Apep on Ra's barge, is the chief deity of the Hyksos people. This consort of Nephthys tricks his brother into a chest and then dismembers him. For 10 points, name this Egyptian rival of Osiris and Horus, the god of desert and chaos.

ANSWER: Seth [or Setesh; or Sutekh; or Suty]

Result: 953 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Camazotz + Illinois | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 39432

Question: This figure's daughter was transformed into a mare after giving birth to a child fathered by Aeolus. For many years, Hesiod was the attributed author of a fragmentary poem about the "precepts" of this figure. For the wedding of Peleus and Thetis, this figure gave Peleus a wooden (*) spear that Peleus's son later used in the Trojan War. This figure cured the blindness of Phoenix and taught Apollo's son Asclepius the art of healing as the father of medicine in Greek mythology. He gave up his immortality and volunteered to die in place of Prometheus after Hercules accidentally hit him with an arrow dipped in the blood of the Hydra. Known for mentoring heroes like Jason and Achilles, for 10 points, name this wisest of the centaurs.

ANSWER: Chiron

Result: 954 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Chicago A | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 39593

Question: This figure is in the Carmen Arvale chant of the Arval Brethren. Cato the Elder describes the suovetaurilia ritual dedicated to this figure, which involves the sacrifice of a boar, a ram and a bull. A hymn dedicated to this figure contains mysterious words like "cozeulodorieso" and was chanted by a group of preists led by the praesul. Nerio was the consort of this figure, who was conceived without a father when (*) Flora touched his mother with a magical flower. According to Strabo, the Picenti are named for an animal sacred to this deity, the woodpecker. The salii, or "jumping priests," protected this deity's sacred ancile, 11 copies of which were made by Numa after that shield fell from the sky. This god seduced a woman forced by Amulius to become a vestal virgin, resulting in the birth of twins. For 10 points, name this god who seduced Rhea Silvia, the father of Romulus and Remus who was the Roman god of war.

ANSWER: Mars

Result: 955 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Chicago B | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 39677

Question: This object cuts the tail off of a hawk after its owner realizes the true identity of a figure who asks him a riddle. A courtier who once tried to take this object was slain by tafl-playing woman disguised as a man. It was transferred from its first owner to its second alongside the first owner's daughter Eyfura. This object was found beside a dead man on a hill of flowers by Orvar-Odd, who attempted to bury it after the first of its three great evil deeds. The last of those deeds happens after this object's final wielder leads the (*) Goths to victory over the Huns. Heidrek owned this sword after eleven brothers of one wielder all died, and after him ownership passed to a younger Argantyr. Created by Dvalin and Durin, this object notoriously could not be unsheathed without claiming a life. For 10 points, name this eponymous sword from a cycle in the Poetic Edda, named for an appendage that the Norse god of war only retained five of after an encounter with Fenrir.

ANSWER: Tyrfing [or finger of Tyr; accept word forms; prompt on partial answer]

Result: 956 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Harvard | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 40326

Question: Depictions of this object often include the twins Abtu and Anet and showed Pestu, representing time, coiled around a disk. Like the Milky Way, this object may be represented at the bottom of the Nebra Disk. The early god Aker, represented by two lions, is show in the Pyramid Texts allowing this object to enter Ur-Nes before reaching the snake-filled desert of Sokar. The activities of this object provided the structure for the twelve-section (*) Amduat, while the popular god du jure was often shown violently defending it from a demonic serpent; figures like Aten or Set are thus often depicted perched atop the front of this object. Opposed by Apep during its nightly voyages, for 10 points, identify this vehicle captained by Ra that carries a certain bright celestial object across the sky.

ANSWER: the solar barge or the solar ship [accept equivalents involving the sun and a boat; accept Ra's ship or equivalents before "Ra," prompt afterward; be generous and prompt on "the Sun;" accept with some incredulity Mandjet or Mesektet]

Result: 957 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Michigan A + Brian McP | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 40354

Question: One deity who ruled over this phenomenon possessed a necklace with 130 golden balls, took the form of a swan on a lake named Dragon's Mouth, and inflicted it on Ireland after eloping with her lover. In Japanese tradition, rituals to ward off the influence of the Three Worms on Koshin days were marked by avoiding this phenomenon, associated with Caer Ibormeith. In ancient times, people known as Seekers would travel to (*) Incubation Temples designed for and named after this practice, which were often dedicated to either Imhotep or Asclepius. The Greek deity associated with this concept was sometimes depicted with an inverted torch as a winged young man and resided in Erebos, a land beyond the reaches of the sun. That son of Nyx, whose Roman equivalent is Somnis, was aided by Morpheus. For 10 points, name this phenomenon presided over by Hypnos, whose most prominent mythical practitioner may be Rip Van Winkle.

ANSWER: sleep [accept dreaming during the first two sentences, prompt thereafter]

Result: 958 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Minnesota A | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 40466

Question: The name of Sir Gawain's Welsh equivalent, Gwalchmai, is generally translated as the one of these "of the field" or "of May." Though he often manifested himself as the black-and-white bull Bakha, the war god Menthu is generally depicted as having the head of one of these creatures. Another god associated with these animals had his toes cut off as punishment for unknowingly ferrying Isis to an island. That god, Nemty, was often syncretized with an Egyptian god represented by this animal who fathered (*) Imsety and the other three gods of the canopic jars. Freya owns a cloak associated with these creatures, who include Vedrfolnir, who perches atop the head of an eagle at the top of Yggdrasil. The cobra goddess Wadjet personified the "eye" of a god bearing the head of this animal; that god slew Set to avenge his father, Osiris. Horus sports the head of, for 10 points, what kind of predatory bird?

ANSWER: falcons [accept hawks due to general mythological conflation; prompt on "birds" or "raptors;" do not accept "eagles"]

Result: 959 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: No Eric, No Crown | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 40494

Question: It's not salt, but this substance can be thrown at the Aswang, a winged demon from Filipino folklore in order to cause its skin to become irritated. In Zoroastrian legend, the death of Gayomart caused this substance to fall to the ground which after forty years of exposure to sunlight gave rise to two rhubarb plants. In Hindu myth, the exchange of this substance between Mitra and Varuna results in the waxing and waning of the moon. Enki once ate plants contaminated with this substance causing his mouth and lips to swell up until this substance was taken by Ninhursag resulting in the (*) birth of eight gods. In order to best Set, Horus once dressed a lettuce leaf with this substance and got Set to consume it. In another myth, Pasiphae cursed her husband Minos to produce scorpions and spiders instead of this substance in order to curb his adulterous ways. For 10 points, identify this natural substance which mixed with sea foam to create Aphrodite, presumably after coming from Uranus' severed testicles.

ANSWER: semen or sperm [accept any and all hilarious equivalents]

Result: 960 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Northwestern A + VCU | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 40559

Question: This man is credited with transmitting the worship of the Kabeiroi from Samothrace, as well as with introducing the alphabet to the Greeks. While disguised as a shepherd, this figure played Pan's pipes and tricked Typhon into giving him Zeus' sinews to fit his lyre. While defending he Encheleans in Illyria, this figure was turned into a (*) serpent along with a wife who had earlier been received a wedding present that was later used to recruit the Seven Against Thebes. This man threw stones at the Sparti in order to induce them to fight amongst themselves, until only five were left. This husband of Harmonia slew a dragon sacred to Ares and sowed its teeth in the earth in his most famous endeavor, which saw him follow a cow after finally stopping the long search for his sister Europa. For 10 points, name this man from Greek myth, the foudner of Thebes.

ANSWER: Cadmus

Result: 961 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Northwestern A + VCU | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 40575

Question: This figure discovered that he was fated to kill his cousin after taking that child into his lap, whereupon the exta limbs vanished from Shishupala's body. The bulk of the Harivamsa is structured around the life of this figure, whose death brings on the Kali Yuga. He was suspected by his mother of stealing butter as a child and was mortally wounded after a hunter mistook his foot for a deer. This figure is often depicted while sitting with a consort wearing yellow robes and a peacock feather, and he married (*) Rukimi and thousands of other maidens after freeing them from Narakasura. Yasoda and Nanda adopted this figure, who defeated Pootna, a monster sent by his uncle Kamsa to kill him. While in Vrindavana, he played the flute to seduce Radha, one of the gopi, or milkmaids. During the Battle of Kurukshetra, he served as charioteer to Arjuna, to whom he revealed the Bhagavad Gita. For 10 points, name this blue-skinned eighth avatar of Vishnu.

ANSWER: Krishna

Result: 962 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Ohio State A | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 40597

Question: After this figure's death, his family becomes frozen in time after touching a cursed golden bowl but are rescued by his daughter-in-law Cygfa and a deposed king who led a costly assault on a corpse-reanimating cauldroon. After driving off hunting dogs feeding on a stag in order to let his own dogs eat it, this figure earned the ire of an underworld deity, leading to an arrangement that resulted in this man killing Hafgan during the year he spent (*) trading places with Arawn. This figure is mythology's most proficient player of the Badger-in-a-Bag game, which allowed him to vanquish Gwawl after sighting his love interest on the hill of Gorsedd Arbeth riding a horse nobody could catch. This man's son disappeared after his birth and was thought cannibalized after servants put dog blood on his wife's mouth. This prince of Dyfed is the namesake of the first branch of the Mabinogion. For 10 points, name this father of Pryderi and husband of Rhiannon in Welsh myth.

ANSWER: Pwyll Pen Annwn

Result: 963 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Richard Borty | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 40694

Question: After discovering that his wife Aegialeia had been unfaithful to him, this man left for Aetolia to see his grandfather Oeneus, and later he married Euippe, daughter of Dunus; after death, this man's followers were turned into birds. This hero once fought with the Lycian prince Glaucus, but the fight stopped when the two remembered their old friendship. After killing the spy Dolon, this man drove away the horses of Rhesus the Thracian to keep them from (*) drinking the Scamander. Arriving at Troy with Sthenelus and Capaneus, two other Epigoni, this hero fought Aeneas and wounded Aphordite, and accompanied Odysseus to Lemnos to fetch Philoctetes. This favorite of Athena was a king of Argos like his father Tydeus. For 10 points, identify this Greek warrior from the Trojan war who shares his name with a Thracian giant who owned some flesh-eating mares stolen by Heracles.

ANSWER: Diomedes

Result: 964 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: UVA + Michigan B + Buffalo | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 40719

Question: In one account, the goddess of speech Vach was traded to the Gandharvas in exchange for this god. Vayu and Indra tied in a footrace meant to decide possession of this figure. This god was married to the thirty-three daughters of Prajapati, but was cursed with consumption for preferring Rohini over the others. This god eventually became a moon deity after being syncretized with (*) Chandra. Over a hundred hymns to this figure comprise the ninth mandala of the Rig Veda, which bears his name. Similar to the Persian Haoma, this deity brings inspiration to poets and gave Indra the strength to defeat Vritra; Indra himself was obsessed with the substance this god provided. For 10 points, name this god, the personification of an intoxicating drink beloved of Hindu gods.

ANSWER: Soma

Result: 965 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: Yale A + Minnesota B | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 40745

Question: This figure pulled golden wool from brambles and ants helped her to sort seeds cast on the floor by her jealous mother-in-law. An eagle helped this figure obtain a pitcher of water from the origin of the river Styx, while a talking tower told this figure to give a barley cake to Cerberus on her trip to visit Persephone. This woman dripped burning lamp oil on her husband, the father of her child (*) Hedone. She jumped off a cliff and was carried to a beautiful palace by the West Wind where she was waited on by invisible servants, but persuaded by her jealous sisters to look at her husband as he slept. This woman was compared to the goddess of love, invoking the anger of Aphrodite, her mother-in-law. The myths about this woman mostly stem from an episode in The Golden Ass, as original Greek traditions describe her as the butterfly wing-sporting goddess of the soul. For 10 points, name this figure who everyone at least agrees was the lover of Eros, or Cupid.

ANSWER: Psyche

Result: 966 | BARGE | 2012 | Round: zEditors 1 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 40761

Question: Cychreus was closely linked with one of these creatures, which plagued Salamis. The Egyptian figure Mehem may have inspired the association of this kind of creature with the husband of Eurynome who was overthrown by Cronus. The Minoan place setting at The Dinner Party is for one of these animals, which are dual-wielded by some busty statues discovered on Crete. Admetus and Alcestis had their bridal chamber (*) filled with these beings by Artemis. An encounter with these animals on Mount Cyllene allowed one figure to become the mother of Manto after Hera turned Tiresias into a woman for interrupting a sexual encounter between two of them. Kindness to these creatures allowed Melampus to speak to animals, one of several episodes in which they conferred powers to mortals via ear-licking. Baby Hercules strangled two examples of, for 10 points, what kind of legless reptile?

ANSWER: Snakes [accept equivalents like serpents; accept dragons since the terms are sometimes used interchangeably in regards to various clues]

Result: 967 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 50369

Question: One Eastern god of this type broke off the top of Mount Meru, thereby creating Sri Lanka, and sired the warrior Bhima. A Western god of this thing abducted Oreithyia, and is often grouped with another who fathered the talking horses Balius and Xanthus. Its Hindu god is Vayu, the father of Hanuman, and in Japan, its controlling god Fuujin is brother to the thunder god Raijin. In Book Ten of the Odyssey, Odysseus's men get a bag containing this from Aeolus; four other Greek gods of it, the Anemoi, align with specific cardinal directions. For 10 points, name this natural phenomenon which Boreas and Zephyrus cause to blow.

ANSWER: gods of the wind [prompt "air" or "sky"]

Result: 968 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 50559

Question: This mythical locale's prince Androgeus was killed for his athletic prowess at several games. A later king of this place swore during a storm to sacrifice the first living thing he saw to Poseidon if he got home; that king, who had to kill his son, was Idomeneus. Rhadamanthus was exiled from this domain, whose queens included the zoophilic Pasiphae. Icarus flew away from this realm with his father, Daedalus, after the Labyrinth was built here. A journey from Athens took Theseus to, for 10 points, what place where the Minotaur was kept by King Minos, a long island south of mainland Greece?

ANSWER: Crete [or Kriti]

Result: 969 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 50580

Question: In Cornish folklore these creatures include Cormoran and Gogmagog, who died in early Britain. Two of these creatures floated in a hollow tree trunk to survive a flood of blood in Norse myth. Artemis killed twin beings of this type who attempted to climb a stack of mountains to Olympus. Angrboda was a female one who bore Fenrir. The cow-fed Ymir is a primal one of these creatures, and Jotunheim is home to the "frost" type which antagonizes the Norse gods. For 10 points, name these beings which, in a folktale, live above the magic beanstalk planted by Jack.

ANSWER: giants [or frost giants; prompt "jotunn" or "jotnar"; do not accept "humans" or the like at any point]

Result: 970 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 50611

Question: A visitor to one of these places turned his comb into bamboo shoots to slow down chasing shikome and covered its entrance with a boulder; the visitor was Izanagi. Another of these places is ruled by a council including Hun-Came, who own a ball court. The Japanese Yomi and Mayan Xibalba [shee-BAl-bah] are places of this type. The owner of a third one used a trail of pomegranate seeds to abduct a wife. These places, which are led into by psychopomps, include one which required a golden bough from Aeneas; that one contains the Elysian fields and Tartarus. For 10 points, name these mythical locations where dead souls go.

ANSWER: underworlds [or lands of the dead or next worlds or afterlifes; prompt "hells"]

Result: 971 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 13 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 50636

Question: This deity gave a pet to Cyparissus, who accidentally killed it. This deity employed a talking white bird as a messenger, which he turned into a silent black raven after it said that Coronis had cheated on him. This father of the healer Asclepius was born on the floating island of Delos, and in book I of the Iliad he strikes the Greeks with plague. This son of Leto made the laurel wreath a symbol of victory after pursuing the nymph Daphne, and gave visions to the oracle at Delphi in addition to winning many contests with Hermes's lyre. For 10 points, name this god of music and sunlight, the twin brother of the lunar huntress Artemis.

ANSWER: Phoebus Apollo [or Apollon; do not accept "Helios" at any point]

Result: 972 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 50393

Question: Robert Graves equated one of these beings with Japheth, a son of Noah. Another of these figures employed a scorpion-tailed dragon-woman, Campe, to guard the Hecatonchires. One of these deities personified memory and was the mother of the nine Muses. The Omphalos stone was consumed by another of these deities who castrated his father with a sickle and tried to eat all of his own children. That deity is Cronus. For 10 points, name this group of Greek deities who were overthrown by the Olympians under Cronus's son Zeus.

ANSWER: the Titans

Result: 973 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 50408

Question: This figure punished two hairy weapon thieves, the Cercopes, by hanging them on a shoulder pole. After this man was denied a set of magic horses by Laomedon, he sacked Troy and slew the siblings of Priam. He wrestled the river god Achelous to marry Deianira, who unwittingly gave him a fatal poisoned shirt. This son of Alcmene used castanets near Lake Stymphalia to drive away metallic birds, re-routed the Alpheus and Peneus through Augeas's estate, and wore a pelt after slaying the Nemean lion. For 10 points, name this Greek hero, a son of Zeus who slew the Hydra while completing Twelve Labors with his strength.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 974 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 50429

Question: One being of this name was married to a non-Athena Pallas; she was the first Titan to ally with Zeus against her own kind, and bore four children who include the victory goddess Nike. That being is a goddess or daimon of hatred. Though it's not Acheron, many people brought a coin in their mouth when they visited a place of this name. That source of life-binding oaths was visited by Thetis, who brought her baby here and held it by the heel, which made Achilles invincible. Charon ferried men across, for 10 points, what river of the Greek underworld?

ANSWER: v

Result: 975 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 50468

Question: A wheel and this object are held by Taranis, a Celtic god the Romans encountered. In Hindu myth, a holder of this object destroyed ninety-nine fortresses and rides Airavata, a white elephant; that holder was defeated by a son of Ravana, and is remembered in the Rig Veda for defeating the serpent Vritra with one called the vajra. In Greek tradition, one of these killed Asclepius and they were made by Arges, Steropes, and Brontes, a team of Cyclopes. In Norse myth, they are released from a boomerang-like returning hammer. For 10 points, name this natural phenomenon used as a weapon by Zeus.

ANSWER: lightning bolts [or thunderbolts; prompt "thunder" alone]

Result: 976 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 50481

Question: While hunting a boar, this man refused healing water to a dying companion, since years earlier that "love spot"-bearing companion had eloped with this man's bride. This hero's wife, who was transformed from a deer, was named Sadb (sahv). This mythical father of Ossian isn't dead, but sleeps in a cave until the hour of need. This man's rivals included his father's killer, Goll mac Morna, and he benefitted from sucking his burnt thumb while cooking the Salmon of Knowledge. For 10 points, name this mythical Irish warrior, who led the Fianna and was taught by the similarly-named Finegas.

ANSWER: Finn macCool [or Fionn mac Cumhaill; or Fingal]

Result: 977 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 50503

Question: This god's diet consisted entirely of lettuce. He was worshipped at Avaris after becoming patron deity to the Hyksos. This god defended against serpent attacks in the underworld while helping with the nightly voyage taken by Ra's barge, and his consort was Nephthys. This god stole his nephew's eye while in his battle with Horus, sometime after he dismembered and scattered the fourteen pieces of his brother. This god had flat-topped ears on a long-snouted black head, and ruled over the deserts. For 10 points, name this nemesis of Osiris, an evil Egyptian god.

ANSWER: Set [or Seth; or Seteh; or Bebo]

Result: 978 | BHSAT | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 50550

Question: This being's three children with a serf, a peasant, and a wealthy noblewoman are said to be the basis of social classes. In one myth, this deity responds to a theft by slapping another god in the form of a seal and recovering the Brisingamen necklace, which Loki had stolen. This god's home, renowned for its fine mead, is Himinbjorg. This god with nine mothers has teeth made of gold and ears which can hear grass growing. A sound from this man signals the beginning of Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this god who blows the Gjallarhorn and guards the Bifrost bridge in Norse myth.

ANSWER: Heimdallr [prompt "Rig"]

Result: 979 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Auroni | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 48351

Question: Whenever this figure finished eating, an otherwise-inexhaustible vessel of food would stop producing for the day. The 2008 novel Palace of Illusions retells myths from this character's point of view, and takes its title from a building in which this figure laughed and insulted a guest who mistook a glass floor for a pool and vice versa. An assault on this figure was repaid by the shaving of all but five spots on the offender's head. This female figure has been the devotee of the timiti fire-walking ritual in part because she emerged from a fire sacrifice fully-formed. She was dragged by her dark-blue hair after being placed as a bet in the "game of dice," and a test to wed this woman involved a rotating image of a fish in a reflecting pool. Her clothes only lengthened when her captors tried to strip her naked. FTP, name this woman, a devotee of Krishna whose five Pandava husbands include Arjuna in the Mahabharata.

ANSWER: Draupadi [or Panchali; or Parsani; Yajnaseni; or Yojanagandha; or, actually, Krishnaa with a long "a" at the end]

Result: 980 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Bollinger | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 48289

Question: One person in this group was banished to Rhodes after accidentally killing his great uncle Licymnius and led the forces of Rhodes in the Trojan War. Another one was told by an oracle to look for a man with three eyes, and found a one-eyed man riding a two-eyed horse in Oxylus. In addition to Tlepolemus and Temenus, this group included Aristomachus, who was struck by lightning and had his fleet destroyed due to Hippotes' slaying of a soothsayer. After being adopted by King Aegimius, one of these people was slain in single combat by Echemus while leading an expedition against Atreus. Macaria was sacrificed for the protection of these people, who were taken in by Demophon and saved when their elderly guardian had his youth restored by Hebe. Their conquest of the Peloponnesus is a mythological variation of the Dorian invasion. This group, first led by Hyllus, are defended by Iolaus and hounded by Eurystheus in a Euripides play. FTP, name this group of heroes, who were the sons of the dude who slayed the Hydra.

ANSWER: the Heracleidae [or the Children of Heracles]

Result: 981 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Borglum | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 48380

Question: This woman ate only the softest pine-bark bread, and refused to eat the flesh of any ewe that had been with a ram. She also refuses to milk a cow or hitch a stallion up to the sleigh. The Star and the Moon refuse to help her when she asks where her "golden apple" is, but the Sun advises her to look in a swamp. Earlier, this figure asks her best servant Piltti to find a place where she can give birth, but when Piltti visits the ugly Ruotus, his wife yells that this woman should just give birth in a horse barn. She's turned away from her parents after she gets pregnant by eating a red cowberry, and then she's refused access to the sauna. Virokannas declares her son to be the King of Karelia, which results in Vainamoinen throwing a fit and sailing away. FTP, name this virgin female who's the subject of the 50th and final runo of the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Marjatta

Result: 982 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Byrne | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 48417

Question: In one story, this deity tells Dexicreon to fill his ship with jars of water, which allows him to become rich. She was the mother of Lyrus, about whom we only know that he died childless. In an alternate story about her birth, a fish in the Euphrates River rolls an egg onto the bank which is sat on by doves and hatched into this goddess. This deity was the mother of a king of Sicily named Eryx whom Heracles defeated in a wrestling match. She saved the Argonaut Butes before he swam to the island of the Sirens. Alectryon was turned into a rooster because he fell asleep, and failed to keep lookout during one her affairs. This deity was a daughter of Dione and the mother of Harmonia. Her primary place of worship was the Cypriot city of Paphos, and after bragging of an affair with this goddess, Anchises was struck with a thunderbolt. FTP, name this wife of Hephaestus and mother of Aeneas, the Greek goddess of love.

ANSWER: Aphrodite [or Venus I suppose]

Result: 983 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Cheyne | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 45876

Question: During one attempt to find this, a man throws his brother-in-law into a snake-pit - that brother-in-law has a harp tossed down to him and tries to play it with his toes, but he fails to put one of the snakes to sleep and it gnaws out his liver. Two men try to win this by digging a trench to collect blood - but when one of them drinks some of that blood, he's able to hear the speech of birds and he kills his companion. This was first obtained by using a net built by Ran to catch its owner in the shape of a pike at his waterfall - the reason for obtaining this was that Hreidmar demanded a ransom for the death of his son Otter. The desire for this causes Hogni and Gunnar to convince their brother to commit murder, after which this ends up at the bottom of a river. FTP, name this cursed treasure of a dwarf, which is later hoarded by a dragon killed by the sword Gram.

ANSWER: gold of Andvari (or Fafnir's gold - prompt on more general answers like "treasure" unless the player makes it clear that it's the "treasure of Andvari or Fafnir or Sigurd")

Result: 984 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Dartmouth | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 45282

Question: One story says this man's brother was a magician who used his sling to launch boulders into mountains, knocking them down and gouging out valleys - so this man tricked that brother into thinking he'd left some golden cups in a cave, and then sealed him inside with stone slabs. That cave, sometimes called the "House of Hiding," had three "windows" - and this man originally emerged from the middle window with his seven siblings. His father gave him a golden staff and told him to settle when he came to a spot where the staff sunk into the earth. His three brothers also held the title Ayar, but this man was the only one to survive a great flood known as Unu Pachakuti, after which he gave birth to his son Sinchi Roca. He's often said to be the child of the sun god Inti. FTP, name this man who mated with his sister-wife Mama Occlo to give birth to the Incan dynasty of Peru.

ANSWER: Manco Capac (accept Ayar Anca or Ayar Uchu, but not after "golden staff")

Result: 985 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Dartmouth | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 45299

Question: In Aztec myth, the food god Tona-cate-cuhtli punishes the volcano goddess Chantico by doing this to her, after she breaks a taboo by eating dry pepper during a fast. In Polynesian myth, this is done to Irawaru after he catches more fish than his brother-in-law - that act causes Irawaru's wife Hina-uri to throw herself into the sea and curse this act's perpetrator Maui. After the Thracian king Polymestor is blinded, he prophesies that this will happen to a certain figure whose tomb becomes known as "Cynossema" as a result of this happening. It's alternately said that Hecuba does this to herself in order to escape bodyguards of Polymestor. When smoke rises to the heavens, indicating that Tata and Nene have dared to cook a fish rather than living on corn, Tezcatlipoca swoops down from the sky and does this to them. FTP, name this act which Tezcatlipoca does by taking the heads of humans and sticking them onto their asses.

ANSWER: turns into a dog (accept all equivalent answers which indicate a transformation to some sort of dog, prompt with "more specific" on less-specific answers like "they shapeshift" or "they turn into an animal")

Result: 986 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Grames | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 48403

Question: This work calls solitude, sexual abstinence, and fasting "the religious neurosis." It describes Moliere's description of opium in The Imaginary Invalid as "a sleepy faculty / Whose nature is to put the senses to sleep" and derides Kant as "the great Chinaman of Königsberg." It differentiates between "masculine" genius which begets and "feminine" genius that is "happy to be impregnated" like the French in a section titled "Peoples and Fatherlands". This work warns against philosophers who are "commanders and law-givers," advising one to follow a new generation dubbed "Experimenters" who will command a new amoral age, which is described in its "aftersong" titled "From the High Mountains." This work notably claims, "there are no moral phenomena at all, but only a moral interpretation of phenomena" and calls Christianity "Platonism for the people" in its preface. FTP, name this book subtitled "A Prelude to the Philosophy of the Future" and written by Nietzsche, which criticizes thinkers for clinging to Christian morality.

ANSWER: Beyond Good and Evil [or Jenseits von Gut und Böse]

Result: 987 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Grames | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 48404

Question: In one story, this god puts his hands over a turnip and transforms it into a golden egg with purple and green spots -that egg is actually this god's son. On the New Year, he mates with a deity who straddles a river, with one foot on each bank. Sometimes called the Red Man of All Knowledge, he owns an item called Uaithne which springs off the wall and into this man's hands, after he bursts into the feasting hall of king Bres and utters a chant. He wears a tunic that's way too short for him after he drinks a giant vat of porridge and falls asleep. He prevents the sun from rising or setting for nine nights in order to conceal his affair with Boann. His weapon can kill nine men with one side and revive them with the other, and his harp can change the seasons. FTP, name this owner of a really big cauldron, who leads the Tuatha de Danaan and is called the "Good God."

ANSWER: the Dagda (or Eochaid, or a bunch of other names that people won't say)

Result: 988 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Ike | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 46427

Question: Upon death, the pommel of this figure's sword is replaced with a golden pommel that contained his tragic story. Merlin buried the scabbard of this man in a location only accessible by a very thin bridge of steel which no man could pass if they committed evil deeds. This man believes his death is near when he approaches a castle and hears a horn blowing. Earlier, that island castle was traversed by a relative that he would eventually kill, dressed in red armor. The Lady of the Lake demands that this knight be killed as payment for Excalibur, which leads this man to behead her in front of Arthur's eyes. He takes on the quest of the knight that was murdered by Garlon. He was responsible for issuing the "Dolorous Stroke" with the Spear of Destiny, which turned King Pellam's kingdom into the Wasteland. FTP, name this "Knight of the two swords," who has a brother with almost the same name.

ANSWER: Sir Balin le Savage (not Balan! - demand that the player spell the answer unless they emphasize the IN portion of his name!)

Result: 989 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Magin | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 44506

Question: This character was aided in his most important quest by a wolf which, after killing this character's horse, apologized and offered to let this character ride him to where he needed to go. That wolf also helped to revive this character after the latter's murder by his brothers by obtaining the Water of Life and Death from a raven, and further aided this character by shapeshifting into both a horse and a woman, allowing this character to steal the actual horse and woman. This character was captured repeatedly after failing to ignore instructions not to touch both a golden bridle and a golden cage, both of which were associated with animals that belonged to Tsar Afron and Tsar Dalmat. This character obtained a feather for his father by grabbing another animal by the tail, and later obtained the animal itself, as well as Elena the Beautiful, whom he married after his father Vyslav had his brothers Dimitri and Vasiliy thrown in the dungeons for the aforementioned murder. FTP, identify this folk hero of Slavic legend who captured the Firebird.

ANSWER: Ivan Vyslavovich

Result: 990 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Mik | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 46003

Question: In one story, this man succeeds at catching Old Pegasus, after men like Kingdom Come and Old Satan fail. The "Genius", "Adventures" and "Exodus" of this man were written about by Mody Boatright. He once threw the Bear Lake Monster into Scotland, where it became the Loch Ness Monster.. He accidentally shoots his wife in a one-act play by Sam Shepard named for the sad lament of this figure. He spots his love interest riding on a catfish, but in some stories, has to shoot her when she's stuck bouncing up and down from the moon. He uses a rattlesnake called Shake and rides the horse Widow-Maker. The soft soil of the Everglades saves him after he's sucked up by a tornado diverted from his family's house. This lover of Slue-foot Sue invented the first six-shooter, and was raised by a coyote after falling out of a Conestoga wagon. FTP, name this cowboy of American folklore.

ANSWER: Pecos Bill

Result: 991 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Moyen | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 48331

Question: According to the Dogon people of Mali, one of these objects was destroyed by seven great earthquakes, and was associated with the god Amma. In Hindu myth, this type of object was called the Hiranyagarbha. The Bon people of Tibet sing that three of these objects hold a golden arrow, a turquoise arrow, and a golden spindle. A Pelasgian myth says that Eurynome created one of these items after dancing with the wind and mating with the snake Ophion, who then coiled himself around one of these. In the Kalevala, several of these objects fall from Ilmatar's knee when her knee becomes too warm. The Chinese god Pangu emerges from one of these after a deep slumber, while a creature called the Benu in Egyptian myth deposits one of these on the sacred mound. FTP, name these objects often found in creation myths, which can be laid in primordial waters by birds.

ANSWER: eggs (cosmic eggs, world eggs, golden eggs - anything like that)

Result: 992 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Petereson | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 48442

Question: This man's flocks of sheep are constantly chased by a wolf sent by Psamathe, until Psamathe is convinced to turn the wolf to stone. After being invited on a hunting trip, he falls asleep on the mountain, and the rest of the men hide his sword in a dunghill and leave him, hoping he'll be attacked by wild animals. That occurs after he rejects the romantic advances of Astydameia, who spreads lies, causing revenge to be vowed against this man by king Acastus. He was given a lance made out of an ash tree by his grandfather Chiron. He accidentally killed king Eurytion with a javelin during the Calydonian boar hunt, forcing him to flee Phthia. Along with his brother Telamon, he'd earlier killed his half-brother Phocus, forcing him to flee Aegina. He corners his wife in a grotto by the sea despite her attempts to shape-shift, but a golden apple thrown by Eris disrupts their celebrated wedding. FTP, name this husband of Thetis and father of Achilles.

ANSWER: Peleus

Result: 993 | Chicago Open | 2012 | Round: Teitler | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 47315

Question: This man cursed his city from Mount Gargettus after returning from a long absence to find that his throne had been usurped by the first demagogue, a son of Peteos named Menestheus. After his ghost came to the aid of the Greeks at the Battle of Marathon, Cimon was led by a female eagle clawing the ground to this man's grave on Scyros, where he had been pushed off a cliff by his host Lycomedes. His descendants had tiny butts because this man lost much of his rear end when Heracles freed him from a chair in Hades, where he'd gone on a mission to kidnap Persephone with his friend Pirithous. A rejection by this man's son led to suicide of his second wife, Phaedra, whose younger sister saved this man's life on Crete by giving him a ball of thread. FTP, name this Athenian hero who entered the Labyrinth and killed the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 994 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 32853

Question: This "Foremost of the Westerners" is linked with Serapis through the Apis bull. This son of Geb and Nut (NOOT) was cut into fourteen pieces that were scattered throughout the country by his brother. His wife revived him after she and Nephthys (NEF-this) found thirteen of those pieces. After he was revived, this brother of Set fathered Horus. For 10 points, identify this husband of Isis and the Egyptian god of the dead.

ANSWER: Osiris [accept Anubis before "Serapis" is read; prompt on Khenti-Amentiu]

Result: 995 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 33163

Question: One deity from this myth system received the four winds as a gift from his grandfather and used them to kill its creator goddess, Tiamat (TEE-ah-maht). Another deity from this myth system corresponds to the Sumerian Inanna (ee-NAH-nah) and removed seven objects of clothing at seven different gates in the underworld. For 10 points, Marduk (MAR-dook) and Ishtar appear in what myth system that also includes the legendary king Gilgamesh?

ANSWER: Babylonian [accept Mesopotamian; do not accept other more specific Mesopotamian civilizations, such as "Sumerian" or "Assyrian"]

Result: 996 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 32880

Question: This god, sometimes known as Eubuleus (yoo-BOO-lee-us) or Clymenus, punished Sisyphus by requiring him to roll a boulder up a hill. This oldest son of Rhea abducted his future wife while she was picking flowers in the fields of Nysa and then tricked her into staying with him for six months each year by feeding her pomegranate seeds. For 10 points, name this husband of Persephone, the Greek god of the Underworld.

ANSWER: Hades [prompt on Pluto]

Result: 997 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 32894

Question: According to one myth, this figure used the eye of the Graiae (GRAY - eye) as a bargaining tool in order to learn the location of the Hesperides. He was born after his mother, Danae, was impregnated by Zeus in the form of a golden shower. This figure defeated Cetus, after which he married Andromeda. After this hero slew his most famous foe, Pegasus was born from her blood. For 10 points, name this slayer of Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 998 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 33037

Question: Before this event, a three-year winter will end almost all life. During this event, one deity's son will use a giant shoe to take revenge for his father's death. At its start, Heimdall will blow the Gjallarhorn and Loki will break free from his imprisonment. During this event, Thor will kill the Midgard Serpent, only to die from its poison. For 10 points, name this event marking the end of the world in Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Ragnarök [prompt on Gotterdammerung; prompt on end of the world]

Result: 999 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 33055

Question: Homer claimed that this place never has storms and is bound in aether. One goddess associated with this location is Hebe, who serves its residents nectar and ambrosia. Bellerophon (bell-AIR-oh-fahn) tried to fly to this location after slaying the Chimera, but Zeus sent a gadfly to sting Pegasus and Bellerophon fell off. For 10 points, identify this location in Greek myth, the home of Poseidon, Hera, and Zeus.

ANSWER: Mount Olympus

Result: 1000 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 33064

Question: This figure lost his first wife after she bounced so high she hit her head on the moon. He won a wrestling match with the Bear Lake Monster and wore a rattlesnake necktie. This figure was raised by coyotes until the age of fifteen and attempted to ride a tornado like a horse, creating Death Valley when he finally fell off. For 10 points, name this cowboy hero of American folklore.

ANSWER: Pecos Bill [prompt on Bill]

Result: 1001 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 33082

Question: This goddess may have conceived children by eating lettuce. This "cow-eyed" goddess had a wagon pulled by peacocks. She sent a gadfly to sting a cow who had escaped from the hundred-eyed monster Argus. That cow, Io, was one of the women seduced by her philandering husband. For 10 points, name this queen of the Olympians and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 1002 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 33090

Question: Three of these creatures named Brontes (BRAWN-teez), Steropes (stair-OH-peez), and Arges (ARgeez) forged Zeus's lightning bolts and, after their creation, were locked in Tartarus by Uranus. Poseidon conjured a storm in rage after one of these creatures was blinded by "nobody." That creature lived on an island with a flock of sheep and was called Polyphemus (pawl-ee-FEE-muss). For 10 points, name this race of one-eyed giants from Greek mythology.

ANSWER: Cyclopes [or Cyclops]

Result: 1003 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 33108

Question: A popular novel about this figure is T.H. White's The Once and Future King. In the Annales Cambriae (ah-NAH-less CAM-bree-ay), this figure was mortally wounded at the Battle of Camlann during a fight with his son Mordred. In that text, the wizard Merlin is mentioned only once, though in Thomas Malory's The Death of this figure, Merlin helps this man find Excalibur. For 10 points, name this legendary king of Britain.

ANSWER: King Arthur

Result: 1004 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 33120

Question: This deity was forced to serve Admetus (add-MEE-tuss) after killing the Cyclops that killed his son. This deity killed the sons of a certain women who boasted to this god's mother about having 14 children; that woman is Niobe (nye-OH-bee). He pursued Daphne until she was turned into a laurel tree and played a lyre created for him by Hermes. For 10 points, name this Greek god of music and poetry, the twin brother of Artemis.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 1005 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 33131

Question: This figure was nearly killed by his own father when Medea tricked the father into giving this figure a poisoned cup of wine. That cup was knocked away when this figure revealed a sword his father had hidden under a boulder with a pair of sandals. When this hero returned home with black sails, his father, Aegeus, jumped into the sea. For 10 points, name this first king of Athens and slayer of the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 1006 | Collegiate Novice | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 33994

Question: Yearly tributes to this figure resulted when Androgeus died in an attempt to slay its father after the Panathenian festival. Its killer abandoned his companion on Naxos, after which she wedded Dionysus. This figure, whose proper name was Asterion, was conceived after Dedalus manufactured a wooden animal for Pasiphae to sit inside. After its defeat, its killer escaped its prison with the help of a golden thread given to him by Ariadne. For 10 points, name this monster from Greek mythology, which resided in the Labyrinth and was half man and half bull.

ANSWER: the Minotaur [accept Asterion before mentioned]

Result: 1007 | Collegiate Novice | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 34282

Question: The mortal Acis was killed by one of these creatures and turned into a river because the sea nymph Galatea rejected his love. In the Theogony, Hesiod described three of these creatures named Brontes, Steropes, and Arges. A man who encountered one of these creatures claimed that his name was "nobody" and escaped by hiding under sheep. Odysseus tricked Polyphemus, one of these creatures, others of which made the thunderbolts for Zeus. For 10 points, name these mythological creatures with one eye.

ANSWER: Cyclops [or Cyclopes]

Result: 1008 | Collegiate Novice | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 34048

Question: In one of this group's myth stories, the Four Hundred Southerners demand to know the identity of their mother's impregnator. This group, whose creation myth involves five suns, reveres a god of a "smoking mirror" and a "left-handed hummingbird." This group believed that the dead were ferried by a dog-headed psychopomp to the realm of Mictlan. Tlaloc, this group's god of rain, was the dedicatee of many child sacrifices. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican civilization whose gods included Huitzilopochtli, Tezcatlipoca, and Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: the Aztecs [or Mexica]

Result: 1009 | Collegiate Novice | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 34108

Question: In one story, this god takes the guise of Bolverk and causes nine fieldworkers to kill themselves over a magical whetstone. Because this figure drinks nothing but wine and eats nothing, he gives all of his food to two wolves. This son of Bor has a ring that multiplies every nine nights, Draupnir. A pair of ravens helps him to see everything from his throne, Hlidskjalf. He hung himself by his spear from the World Tree to learn the runes and he gave one of his eyes to drink from Mimir's Well. For 10 points, name this "All-Father," the chief god of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin [or Woden; or Wotan; or Othinn; or All-Father before mentioned]

Result: 1010 | Collegiate Novice | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 34132

Question: This phenomenon was stored in a fennel stalk by a figure who tricked Zeus into accepting bones and fat. During Ragnarok, it will be thrown across the world by Surt. During the Exodus, God appears as a pillar of this substance, which was the form in which the Holy Spirit manifested on Pentecost. The river Phlegethon is composed of this substance, the gift of which Zeus punished by chaining a Titan to a mountain and having an eagle eat his liver every day. For 10 points, name this phenomenon that Prometheus gave to man.

ANSWER: fire [accept all synonyms such as flames]

Result: 1011 | Collegiate Novice | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 34149

Question: When Rama was rescuing Sita, he tried to use these objects to dry up the ocean. Apollo uses them to bring disease to the Greeks in the Iliad. Odysseus proves his identity when he returns to Ithaca by winning a contest that involved twelve axe heads and one of these objects. Philoctetes was given the ones that belonged to Heracles, which were dipped in the blood of the Hydra. The Amazons cut off one of their breasts so they could fire them more easily. For 10 points, name these objects, gold-tipped ones of which were used by Cupid to make people fall in love.

ANSWER: arrows [accept bow(s) and arrow(s); prompt on bows;]

Result: 1012 | Collegiate Novice | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 34189

Question: This man was the father of Sthenalus and the grandfather of the man who sent Heracles on his Twelve Labors, Eurystheus. This man, who founded Mycenae, was born after his mother was impregnated by a golden shower. Polydectes sent him on a quest during which he borrowed winged sandals, an invisibility helmet, and a reflective shield. He killed a sea monster who was about to eat Andromeda, whom he would later marry. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who cut off the head of Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 1013 | Collegiate Novice | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 34230

Question: In this country, a sacred mirror is housed inside a temple that is rebuilt every twenty years. One deity from this country was offended by her brother's noise and hid in a cave, but was lured out by a sensuous dance. A god in this country's myth system gave birth to a storm god from his nose, a moon god from his right eye, and a sun goddess from his left eye after failing to retrieve his sister-wife from Yomi, the underworld. Deities in this country's myth system are called kami. For 10 points, name this island country that is home to the deities Izanagi and Amaterasu.

ANSWER: Japan [or Nihon-koku; or Nippon-koku]

Result: 1014 | Collegiate Novice | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 34260

Question: One of these figures is allowed to marry Njord after her father was killed for kidnapping Idunn in the form of an eagle. One of these figures will battle Freyr while wielding a flaming sword. Another of these figures challenges a god to wrestle with Old Age and to empty a drinking horn that is connected to the sea. Utgard-Loki is one of these figures, which are the constant antagonists of Thor, who likes smashing their heads in with his hammer, like he did to Hrungnir. For 10 points, name this Norse race of large mythological beings.

ANSWER: giants [or jotunn; or jotnar]

Result: 1015 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 61139

Question: One deity of this realm was the goddess Salacia, who was queen to the Roman god of this realm. The enemy of Ba'al, Yam, was the Canaanite god of this entity. A warrior raped by one deity of this realm asked to be changed from a woman into a man; that was Caeneus. That same deity of this realm gave a gift of a war weapon to the people of Attica but had his gift rejected for that of Athena, an olive tree. One of that deity's sons was Proteus, and his wife was Amphitrite. FTP, the Norse god Aegir was a deity of what realm, as was Poseidon in Greek myth.

ANSWER: sea or ocean gods [prompt on "water"]

Result: 1016 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 61733

Question: One story has this deity and his consort sleeping on the thousand-headed serpent Shesha, which represents eternity. Shesha floats on a body from which the nectar of immortality, Amrita, was desired by this deity, who proceeded to churn the ocean of milk to get it. His upper-left hand holds Panchajanya, a conch shell, representing his fecundity. His consort is Lakshmi, and at certain times he can incarnate himself, as he does in the forms of Rama and Krishna. FTP what Hindu deity is the preserver?

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 1017 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 61764

Question: One of these entities is Vaitarna, which separates Naraka, the realm of the Hindu death deity Yama, from the earth. In Norse myth, one of these is Ifing, which separates the Jotunheim from Asgard. One myth says the son of Helios and Gaia was turned into one of these for giving water to the Titans during their battle with the Olympians; that one begins in Tartarus, and required a coin placed in the mouth of the dead to be crossed. Including Cocytus and Phegethon, FTP what mythical entities included Acheron, across which Charon ferried the dead?

ANSWER: rivers

Result: 1018 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 61173

Question: The Hyksos worshiped this god as their primary deity at their capital of Avaris. Under the Rameside rulers, this deity was said to fight off the serpent Apopis from the Solar Bark. The oxyrhynchus fish was said to be holy to this deity because it ate the penis of his brother. Another tale has it that he only ate lettuce, which plant was ejaculated into by an enemy to humiliate this god when the semen was called forth by the other gods. Representing the desert and married to Nephthys was, FTP, what Egyptian god who chopped up his brother Osiris?

ANSWER: Seth or Set

Result: 1019 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 61194

Question: The Irish deity Lugh obtained one of these from the island Gorias, the possession of which guaranteed its holder couldn't lose in battle. One of these objects made from the bones of the sea monster Coinchenn was given by Scathach to an Irish hero; when that one was used in battle, its victim had to be cut open to retrieve it. That weapon, Gae Bolg, belonged to Cuchulainn. Viking warriors were alleged to throw one of these over their opponents' battle lines in order to commence battle, partly in homage to one of these weapons created by the sons of Ivaldi. FTP Odin's Gungnir is what type of weapon?

ANSWER: spear

Result: 1020 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 61340

Question: In the Poetic Edda, the youngest Norn is also one of these figures. The Prose Edda includes them in a list of those present at Baldur's funeral. Njal's saga describes a loom created by these figures, comprising the heads and entrails of men, a sword, and arrows. In the thirtieth stanza of Voluspa, two of these figures provide mead for Odin, while eleven others provide ale to the Einherjar. FTP, name these female warrior maidens of Norse myth, "choosers of the slain" who bring fallen fighters to Valhalla.

ANSWER: Valkyries

Result: 1021 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 61618

Question: Participating in this action could turn one into a Wendigo in the myths of the Algonquin people of the Americas. Telepylus was the capital of a race of giants visited by Odysseus who engaged in this practice, the Laestrygones [les-TRIG-uh-neez]. The Thracian king Tereus unwittingly did this in a punishment crafted by his wife Procne for raping her sister Philomela. An ivory shoulder was fashioned for Pelops after Demeter unknowingly engaged in this behavior at a banquet. FTP, Tantalus was punished for allowing Demeter to violate what taboo after he cooked his son Pelops?

ANSWER: cannibalism (accept obvious equivalents like "eating people")

Result: 1022 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 61628

Question: This god asked his daughter's suitor for alternative names to thirteen words all night until he turned to stone in daylight. This god acquired two servants after a farmer's son broke a thigh bone to get marrow. The goats Tooth-gnasher and Tooth-grinder pull this god's chariot. During a visit to Utgard, this god is unable to wrestle with old age, lift Jormungandr, or swallow the ocean. This god used a magic belt and iron gloves to defeat Geirrod, a frost giant. This father of Magni and husband of Sif owned Mjollnir, a magic hammer. For 10 points, name this Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 1023 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 61648

Question: This god asked his daughter's suitor for alternative names to thirteen words all night until he turned to stone in daylight. This god acquired two servants after a farmer's son broke a thigh bone to get marrow. The goats Tooth-gnasher and Tooth-grinder pull this god's chariot. During a visit to Utgard, this god is unable to wrestle with old age, lift Jormungandr, or swallow the ocean. This god used a magic belt and iron gloves to defeat Geirrod, a frost giant. This father of Magni and husband of Sif owned Mjollnir, a magic hammer. For 10 points, name this Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 1024 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 61671

Question: At a sanctuary named for this goddess, Spartans would try to steal cheese while others whipped them. This goddess born on Mount Cynthus turned Arethusa [ar-uh-THOO-zuh] into a fountain in order to escape from a river god. King Oeneus [EE-nee-uhs] forgot to make a sacrifice to this goddess, who released the Calydonian boar. This goddess killed the daughters of Niobe and transformed Actaeon into a stag. This daughter of Leto and twin sister of Apollo was often depicted as a huntress. For 10 points, name this goddess whose Roman counterpart was Diana.

ANSWER: Artemis [or Cynthia]

Result: 1025 | Delta Burke | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 61691

Question: At a sanctuary named for this goddess, Spartans would try to steal cheese while others whipped them. This goddess born on Mount Cynthus turned Arethusa [ar-uh-THOO-zuh] into a fountain in order to escape from a river god. King Oeneus [EE-nee-uhs] forgot to make a sacrifice to this goddess, who released the Calydonian boar. This goddess killed the daughters of Niobe and transformed Actaeon into a stag. This daughter of Leto and twin sister of Apollo was often depicted as a huntress. For 10 points, name this goddess whose Roman counterpart was Diana.

ANSWER: Artemis [or Cynthia]

Result: 1026 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57825

Question: Upon first acquiring this object, its owner granted a future favor that became a request for the head of Sir Balin. The predecessor to this item was destroyed in a duel against the father of Tor and Lamorak, King Pellinore, while the companion piece to this object prevented its wearer from losing blood in battle, but was thrown away by Morgana le Fay. After the Battle of Camlann, Sir Bedivere saw a mysterious hand emerge from a pool when he went to return this weapon to the Lady of the Lake. For 10 points, name this weapon that succeeded another object that was pulled out of an anvil and a slab of marble, the sword of King Arthur.

ANSWER: Excalibur [Accept Caliburn.]

Result: 1027 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 58083

Question: With a cult center at Abydos, this god was usually depicted wearing a crown with ostrich feathers, and he eventually became conflated with the corn god Neper, and later to the bull god Apis in a syncretic deity known as Serapis. This god carried a crook and flail, and was found in a tamarisk tree at Byblos by his wife, who was his sister since both were children of Geb and Nut. This god was cut up into fourteen pieces by his jealous brother Set, after which he became ruler of a location where dead souls were weighed by Anubis against the feather of Maat. For 10 points, name this husband of Isis and father of Horus, the Egyptian god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Osiris [Accept Usiris.]

Result: 1028 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 58103

Question: In fulfillment of a prophecy that his death would "come from the sea," this man was killed by a stingray-tipped spear thrown by his son Telegonus. This hero attempted to avoid fighting at Troy by feigning madness but was discovered when Palamedes placed his son in front of his plow. A grandson of the thief Autolycus, this man was found washed ashore by Nausicaa and brought home by the Phaeacians. This man's dog Argus died upon his return, after which he fired an arrow through the rings of twelve axes and proceeded to slaughter the suitors of his wife, Penelope. For 10 points, name this clever king of Ithaca who took ten years to return home from the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Odysseus

Result: 1029 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 58171

Question: One myth from this country tells of how one of its gods saved a rabbit that had lost its fur after insulting a group of sharks, and later retrieved a turnip-shaped arrow from a burning field. This country's folk tales feature cucumber- riding water demons called kappas as well as an eight-headed dragon that was slain by this country's sea god. This country was supposedly formed when its creator god Izanagi dripped brine from his spear, and its sun goddess retreated into a cave after her brother threw a flayed horse into her room. That goddess, Amaterasu, was the ancestor of this country's first emperor, Jimmu. For 10 points, name this nation home to the many kami of the Shinto religion.

ANSWER: State of Japan [Accept Nippon-koku or Nihon-koku.]

Result: 1030 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 13 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 58199

Question: Heracles was rewarded with the opportunity to sleep with King Thespius' fifty daughters after ridding his lands of one of these creatures. Atalanta and Hippomenes were transformed into these creatures for making love in the temple of Cybele, while another of these creatures became associated with Sir Yvain after he rescued it from a serpent. During her murderous rampage as Sekhmet, Hathor took this form that also formed the head of the Chimera. Their best known example had skin that could not be pierced by any weapon, forcing Heracles to strangle it for his first labor, after which he wore its skin. For 10 points, name these large cats, one of which lived in Nemea.

ANSWER: lions

Result: 1031 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 14 (Finals 1) | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 58217

Question: In Norse myth, one of these objects was used by Gunther to ward off snakes in his dungeon, and the giant Eggther sits on a hill with one of these objects while watching Ragnarok unfold. One of these objects named Uaithne was used by the Dagda to keep the four seasons in order, while the jawbone of a large pike was used by Vainamoinen to create the first kantele, a Finnish variant of these objects. The first of these objects was created from a turtle shell by Hermes, after which he gave it to Apollo to appease his anger over the theft of his cattle. For 10 points, name these objects often used by Orpheus, musical instruments consisting of an array of framed strings.

ANSWER: harps or lyres [Accept kantele before it is read. Prompt on "musical instruments."]

Result: 1032 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 15 (Finals 2) | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 58245

Question: According to the Poetic Edda, Helgi Hjorvarthsson married one of these figures named Svava, while another story in the same text tells of how Volund and his brothers found and married three of them in the Wolfdales. The most famous of these figures was imprisoned in a wall of fire by Odin for killing too many warriors, but was rescued by a hero acting on the behalf of Gunther in exchange for Guthrun's hand in marriage. That hero was Siegfried, the hero of the Volsung Saga. In addition to Brynhilda, these figures included those who carried the bodies of fallen warriors to Valhalla. For 10 points, name these winged warrior women in Norse mythology.

ANSWER: valkyries

Result: 1033 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57847

Question: One son of this figure was born with full armor and became the father of Geryon, whose cattle was stolen by Heracles. When Athena punished this mother of Chrysaor for sleeping with Poseidon in Athena's temple, she assumed the same form as her sisters, daughters of Phorcys and Ceto named Stheno and Euryale. This figure was eventually killed by a hero armed with a mirrored shield and the winged sandals of Hermes, and one part of her body was used to save Danae from Polydectes before it was mounted on Athena's aegis shield. For 10 points, name this monster slain by Perseus who had snakes for hair and was so ugly that her face turned people into stone.

ANSWER: Medusa

Result: 1034 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57860

Question: The Irish god Manannan mac Lir owned one of these named Enbarr that carried his daughter Niamh and her lover Ossian across the sea, while Sir Gawain owned one of these creatures named Gringolet. During a nighttime raid, Odysseus and Diomedes brought these creatures belonging to Rhesus back to the Greek camp. Other examples of these animals include two children of Zephyrus which were given to Peleus as a wedding gift, Xanthus and Balius. Loki assumed the form of one of these animals when he mated with Svadilfari to give birth to an eight-legged one named Sleipnir. For 10 points, name these creatures that include a giant wooden one associated with Troy.

ANSWER: horses

Result: 1035 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57938

Question: Quetzalcoatl entered the Aztec version of this place to acquire the greenstone bones, after which he was chased away by a flock of quails sent by its ruler Mictlantecuhtli. Pwyll once chased away some red-eared dogs belonging to Arawn, the Welsh ruler of this location known as Annuvin. Theseus was stuck to the chair on which he was sitting after trying to kidnap the Greek queen of this location, who was forced to live here after eating pomegranate seeds. That location was guarded by the three-headed hound Cerberus and visited by Orpheus when he came to win his wife back. For 10 points, name these places ruled by figures like Hades and inhabited by dead souls.

ANSWER: underworlds [Accept land of the dead and equivalents before "dead souls." Accept Mictlan before "Mictlantecuhtli."]

Result: 1036 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 57960

Question: With the help of a servant, this man defeated a stone-hearted clay giant. That battle resulted in this god requiring help from the seer Groa in removing a whetstone from his head. This god gained the service of Roskva and the aforementioned servant Thialfi when the latter broke the thigh-bone of one of his goats. In addition to killing the giant Hrungnir, this god once fished his mortal enemy out of the ocean and failed to lift its paw when it assumed the form of a cat in the realm of Utgard-Loki. For 10 points, name this enemy of the Midgard Serpent who owned the hammer Mjolnir, the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 1037 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 58114

Question: As punishment for sending a storm after Heracles on his return from Troy, Hera was hung by her hands from this location with two anvils at her feet. Two residents of this place were the targets of a kidnapping mission by the giants Otus and Ephialtes, who ended up leaving with Ares in a jar. One hero who tried to reach this location was lamed and doomed to wander the Plains of Aleion after a gadfly was sent to distract Pegasus. Heracles eventually settled here and married its cupbearer Hebe, while Hestia gave up her throne in this place to Dionysus. For 10 points, name this abode of the Greek gods, a mountain situated in northern Greece.

ANSWER: Mount Olympus [Accept Oros Olympos]

Result: 1038 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 58141

Question: This man was once imprisoned by three queens until he promised to marry one of them, but he was rescued by the daughter of his friend King Baudemagus. He suffered from madness for two years after being discovered in bed with Elaine of Carbonek, the daughter of the Fisher King. This half-brother of Sir Hector-de-Maris was responsible for the deaths of Gawain's brothers while attempting to rescue his lover from being burned at the stake. He had earlier saved that lover from Meleagant in an adventure that earned him the nickname "Knight of the Cart." For 10 points, name this man who fathered Galahad and had an affair with Guinevere, considered the best knight in the world.

ANSWER: Sir Launcelot

Result: 1039 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 58024

Question: This figure bore a grudge against Pelias of Iolcus because he murdered Sidero in her temple, and later she convinced Aphrodite to make Medea fall in love with Jason after the hero helped her cross a river. This goddess struck Tiresias blind when he claimed that women enjoy sex more, and the Milky Way was created from this goddess' breast milk while she was unknowingly nursing Heracles. One of her servants was a giant with one- hundred eyes named Argus, who was killed by Hermes while watching over Io for her. For 10 points, name this mother of Hebe, Hephaestus, and Ares, the Greek goddess of marriage and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 1040 | Harvard Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 58047

Question: In the Russian tradition, Ivan Tsarevich was sent to capture the Firebird because it stole one of these objects from his father every night. The guardian of these objects in Norse myth was transformed into a nut during her rescue from Thiazzi by Loki, and she was named Idunn. Hippomenes used three of these objects in order to beat Atalanta in a footrace, while Heracles tricked Atlas into retrieving these objects from the Garden of the Hesperides for his 11th labor. One of these objects bore the inscription, "To the fairest," resulting in discord between Hera, Athena, and Aphrodite. For 10 points, name these metallic fruits that caused the Judgment of Paris and the Trojan War.

ANSWER: golden apples

Result: 1041 | Illinois Fall | 2012 | Round: 15 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 42148

Question: One of these figures assigned Campe to watch over Tartarus. Another one of these figures is the personification of the pole around which constellations revolve. In addition to Coeus and Phoebe, they were based out of Mount Othrys and two of them were the parents of the Oceanids. During a ten year long war, Styx vowed to kill these figures. The hundred-handed ones and the cyclops were released from Tartarus to combat them. Including Tethys and Oceanus, these figures also include the mother of the Muses. Another one of these figures overthrew his father using a sickle. For 10 points, name these figures that include Atlas and Cronos, who were rather huge.

ANSWER: titans or titanesses

Result: 1042 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 41074

Question: One legend states that this figure spent much of her life incognito in Egypt and that she was replaced by a copy of herself made out of clouds. In The Odyssey, she receives nepenthe from Polidamma. A later legend describes how she imitated the voice of men's wives during a night raid. The Aeneid describes the ignominy of this woman, who mutilates the body of her last husband Deiphobus. She is both sister and sister-in-law to Clytemnestra. Her mother Leda was impregnated in the form of a swan. Fifty men pursued her when she left Sparta and went to the court of King Priam. For 10 points, name this wife to Menelaus then Paris, a figure largely responsible for the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Helen of Troy

Result: 1043 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 41992

Question: Some traditions record that the first living creature of these peoples was the benu bird, but more traditionally this culture's main god became aware of his own loneliness and impregnated himself by masturbation to produce the first divine siblings. They deified one of their scribes that was credited with inventing stone architecture as a god of medicine that became conflated with Asclepius. This culture syncretized Hermes with their own gods to produce Hermes Trismegestus. The demon Ammit devoured the souls that are heavier than the feather of Ma'at in this culture's judgment of the dead. For 10 points, name this culture whose stories include that of Osiris and Isis.

ANSWER: Egyptians

Result: 1044 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 42033

Question: One offspring of the giant Bran was one of these animals that died when it attacked a flock of swans. The Tecuchi one ferried dead souls to the underworld in Mesoamerica. In ancient Egypt, these animals ate the remnants of the bull of Apis, which is why they are considered unclean. One of these animals was a gift from a dude who ejaculated scorpions to Procis. That one was turned to stone along with the Teumessian Fox. Another one of these animals sits on a dung heap and is the only one to recognize Odysseus when he returns to Ithaca. For 10 points, name these animals, one of which is associated with the star Sirius.

ANSWER: dogs

Result: 1045 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 42038

Question: This hero pretends to be taken off as a prisoner instead of killing the submitted Gologras. He is the brother of a disguised kitchen boy who is accompanied by the dwarf Melot. The last half of Perceval by Chretien de Troyes chiefly describes the tales of this brother of Gareth. He agrees to accept spoils of the hunt in exchange for the daily gifts he receives, so he returns a woman's kisses to her husband. However, he fails to yield the girdle of invincibility he gets from Lady Bertilak. This man takes an axe from King Arthur and severs a man's head, agreeing to receive a blow in return one year later. For 10 points, name this title figure of a work by the Pearl poet, the adversary of the Green Knight.

ANSWER: Sir Gawain

Result: 1046 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 42052

Question: In The Lokasenna, this figure tells Loki he sings an evil song, which prompts Loki to accuse her of incest, since she is "steeped full sore in sin." In addition to Sif, Hrungnir claims that he will take this goddess home with her, and she is the only one who will continuously serve Hrungnir mead. The names of this figure's daughters are Nordic words for treasure - those daughters by Odr are Hnoss and Gersemi. This goddess takes the form of a falcon and rides the boar Hildisvini. This daughter of Njord gets half the slain in battle and dwells in Sessrumnir within Folkvangr. For 10 points, name this Norse fertility goddess, the sister of Frey.

ANSWER: Freyja or Freyia [DO NOT ACCEPT Frey or Freyr]

Result: 1047 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 13 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 42113

Question: Hecale vowed to make a sacrifice to Zeus if one of these animals could be captured. In one of Aesop's fables, a lion tries to trick one of these animals to his death by offering a sheep to it. King Aegeus assigned his son Theseus to hunt down one of these creatures that ravaged the plains of Marathon. To prove he was divine, Minos asked Poseidon to send one of these animals from the sea. That same creature of this sort was later captured by Heracles, which Eurystheus wanted to sacrifice to Hera. In Minoan art, a common motif was to depict people leaping over these animals. For 10 points, name this animal, which is combined with a human to make the minotaur.

ANSWER: bulls [prompt on cattle or cows, since cow nowadays is a gender-neutral synonym for cattle]

Result: 1048 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 14 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 42120

Question: This man tries to kill himself by tying a belt end to his neck, and the other end to a saddle, so that he will be strangled. He does battle against one enemy on a heath which contains a sycamore tree planted in the time of Abel. In one adventure, this man encounters a bridge which is submerged underwater, as well as an alternate path known as "sword bridge." During that adventure he comes to the castle of the virtuous King Bagdemagu and his opposite son Meleagant. Chretien des Troyes calls him "the knight of the cart." Thomas Mallory describes how he was drugged and slept with Elaine of Corbenic to father Galahad. For 10 points, name this knight known for his tempestuous affair with Guinevere.

ANSWER: Lancelot

Result: 1049 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 41099

Question: In one work, this man claimed that "when a woman has scholarly inclinations, there is something wrong with her sexuality." That work claims the "morality of Europe these days is the morality of the herd" and includes a section "On the Prejudices of Philosophers" that asks "Suppose Truth were a woman, what then?" This man wrote another work that blames Euripides for the death of art and champions Richard Wagner. That work distinguishes between the Apollonian and the Dionysian. For 10 points, name this German philosopher of Beyond Good and Evil and The Birth of Tragedy, who famously claimed "God is dead."

ANSWER: Friedrich Nietzsche

Result: 1050 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 41796

Question: One person who tried to go to these figures was Boutes, but he was snatched by Aphrodite and sent to Lilybaion. They were held to be the daughters of Melpomene and the river god Acheloos. Some sources list that Agalope and Thelxeipeia are two of their names. They commit suicide after hearing the beautiful lyre of Orpheus during the voyage of the Argo. Circe tells of how they reside on a meadow with heaps of bones next to them and that they live on an island next to Scylla and Charybdis. To combat them, one man ties himself to the mast of a ship while his crew uses beeswax to cover their ears. For 10 points, name these women who use their musical voices to lure sailors to their death.

ANSWER: sirens

Result: 1051 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 41820

Question: This man's father was banished by both Zethos and Amphion, which gave him time to capture the beautiful youth Chrysippus. His name refers to his swollen feet when he was found on Mount Kithaeron. This man was ordered to bow down to a king travelling to Delphi, but he killed him instead. This man dies in a sacred grove in Colonus after he curses his children Eteocles and Polyneices. This son of King Laius and Jocasta is able to defeat a monster with the answer "man." For 10 points, name this king of Thebes who blinded himself after he married his own mother.

ANSWER: Oedipus

Result: 1052 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 41831

Question: The paradise of these peoples contains a giant worm that creates a cavern with fire, while the underworld of them was reachable by passing by a group of eight valleys with brutal winds that cut like a knife. This culture also believed that the world was created when a deity sacrificed his own foot to a crocodile. It also maintains that the current race of humanity was made out of bones from Mictlan, while their war god was created when Coatlicue was impregnated by a ball of feathers. Their rain god Tlaloc demanded child sacrifices. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican civilization that venerates Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Aztecs [or Mexicas]

Result: 1053 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 41891

Question: This figure offers the conniving Battos a robe to see if he would keep silent about a crime he witnessed, but he turned him to stone when he spoke. This figure is told by Apollo to go visit the thriae at the end of the longest Homeric Hymn, which is dedicated to him. His cult center was at Mount Cilene, which is where he was born. He is the one who gives Odysseus moly to combat Circe, and he gives his winged sandals to Perseus to help him combat the gorgons. This god earned the epithet "Argeiphontes" after he slew a monster with a hundred eyes that was watching over Io. He is the son of Zeus and Maia. For 10 points, name this Greek messenger god, the analogue of Mercury.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 1054 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 41915

Question: On top of this location is a tree with beautiful red and gold leaves. It is completely circled by the river Thund. One can access this location by using Valgrind. At this place, Andhrimnir is a cook who uses his pot Eldhrimnir to cook the boar Saehrimnir, which always comes back to life the next day. It is also home to a goat named Heidrun that feeds on foliage of Lerad, which enables it to produce mead to fill a huge vat. Geri and Freki devour their food from here. It is five hundred and forty doors wide, and Valkyries bring half of the dead to this location. For 10 points, name this "hall of the slain" from Norse legend.

ANSWER: Valhalla

Result: 1055 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 41935

Question: According to the Wife of Bath's tale, this man's unnamed wife was treacherous and had to go visit the marshes. One of this figure's children was killed by Heracles with his own sickle. He is the one who discovered tin and lead and introduced the cult of Cybele to his kingdom. This father of Lityerses was rewarded for helping out a satyr that passed out in his garden of roses. His barber was unable to keep a secret about him, which is why the grass knows that he has asses' ears. He is responsible for the color of the river Pactolus, which is where he washed off a certain gift given to him by Dionysus. For 10 points, name this king of Phrygia who turned whatever he touched into gold.

ANSWER: Midas

Result: 1056 | Illinois Fall Tournament | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 41984

Question: One of this man's companions was Creidne, a princess who slept with her father to produce three sons. This man refused treatment to a hero that was seriously injured while fighting the boar beneath Ben Bulben. That hero was a warrior of this man with a magical love spot on his eye named Diarmuid. One of this man's children is taken away to Tir Na Nog by Niamh - that child is Ossian, whom he had with Sadb. This man gained the gift of prophecy when he ate a creature that had eaten nine hazelnuts - that creature was the salmon of knowledge. For 10 points, name this Irish hero who is described in his namesake work, the Fenian Cycle.

ANSWER: Finn MacCool [or Fionn cum Hail]

Result: 1057 | LIST | 2012 | Round: LISTIII_Round01.docx | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 29512

Question: A prophecy declared that this city would be safe if the king's son Menoeceus sacrificed himself. The walls of this city were built by a man who used a lyre to lift rocks, Amphion, and his brother Zethus. Adrastus was the leader of a group that attacked the gates of this city, and though they were defeated, the Epigoni's sack of it caused the death of a blind prophet who spent seven years as a woman. A king of this city was killed by the father of (*) Eteocles and Polynices; the son of that king, Laius, married his mother Jocasta. For ten points, name this Boeotian city founded by Cadmus that was home to Tiresias and Oedipus.

ANSWER: Thebes (prompt on "Boeotia" before mentioned)

Result: 1058 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 51913

Question: This god once took the form of Gangrad to compete in a contest of wits against Vafthrudnir. He seduced a giantess to steal the Mead of Poetry, and this deity is the owner of the ring Draupnir. This owner of the spear Gungnir joined with his brothers Villi and Ve to slay Ymir, and he hung from the world tree Yggdrasil for nine days and nine nights to gain wisdom. News is brought to this god by the two ravens Huginn and Muninn, and he sacrificed an eye to gain wisdom from Mimir's well. Destined to be killed by Fenrir at Ragnarok, For 10 points, name this chief god of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Odin

Result: 1059 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 52106

Question: This god gave Oenomaus four horses that were faster than the wind, and his son Cycnus was killed when he foolishly challenged Heracles to a duel. This god was once captured by Otus and Ephialtes and trapped in a bronze jar, and he freed Thanatos from the chains of Sisyphus. Cadmus killed a dragon owned by this god while establishing Thebes, and he is often credited with fathering Romulus and Remus. This god was caught in a net created by Hephaestus, and he fathered Phobos and Deimos with Aphrodite. For 10 points, name this Greco-Roman god of war.

ANSWER: Ares [accept Mars]

Result: 1060 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 52125

Question: In one myth, this deity is placated by a handful of rice, which satisfies him after he almost eats the palace of Kubera, the god of wealth. In another, his brother, mounted on a peacock, loses a race to him when he runs around his parents instead of crossing the whole world. He broke off one body part and dipped it in ink to write the Mahabharata, and this deity's mount is a mouse. In one story, this deity attempted to prevent his father from entering their home on his mother's orders, leading Shiva to cut his head off. For 10 points, name this Hindu deity known as the remover of obstacles, often depicted with an elephant's head.

ANSWER: Ganesha

Result: 1061 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 52138

Question: In one creation myth, this figure was created from Nu, the watery chaos which covered the world. In another creation myth, this god sprung forth from a lotus flower and used his spit to create the god of the air and the goddess of moisture, Shu and Tefnut. This deity would use the boats "Mandjet" and "Mesektet" every day and night to travel through the sky. He is usually pictured with a disk on his head, and pharaohs eventually began to be referred to as "sons of" this deity. For 10 points, name this deity commonly linked to Atum and Amun, the sun god of Egyptian mythology.

ANSWER: Ra [accept Re]

Result: 1062 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 51934

Question: This figure joined the Thiasus after losing a drinking contest with Dionysus, and he removed the boulder crushing Ascalaphus. He defeated Achelous in order to win the hand of Deianeria, and he shot an arrow at Helios to receive the golden cup. This husband of Hebe fended off Thanatos to prevent the death of Alcestis and freed Prometheus after killing an eagle. He aided the Olympian gods during Gigantomachy and also cleaned the Augean stables. For 10 points, name this hero who killed the Nemean lion as one of his twelve labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [accept Hercules]

Result: 1063 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 51949

Question: According to Plutarch, this deity was often identified with the monster Typhon. This god was tricked into swearing an oath granting his kingdom to his nephew while intoxicated, and that nephew ejaculated semen into this god's lettuce. He was defeated in a boat race when his opponent painted a wooden boat to resemble stone, and this god battled the serpent Apep in order to ensure Ra's safe passage through the underworld. He is most notorious for murdering his brother Osiris. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of storms, the desert, and chaos, the rival of Horus.

ANSWER: Set [accept Seth or Setesh or Sutekh or Setekh or Suty]

Result: 1064 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 51969

Question: In one story, this deity supported Mount Mandarachala during the churning of the ocean, and this deity holds a conch, lotus, mace, and a discus. One form of this god, Kalki, will end the Kali Yuga era, and he tricked King Bali into allowing him to take three large steps after becoming the dwarf Vamana. Other forms of this deity include Parushurama and a prince that defeated an evil king on Lanka, and his consort is the goddess Lakshmi. For 10 points, name this preserver deity of the Hindu Trimurti who took the form of ten avatars, the eighth of whom was Krishna.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 1065 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 52001

Question: This brother of Deiphobus was adopted by the shepherd Agelaus after being suckled by a she-bear for nine days. His first wife Oenone refused to heal him after he was wounded by Philoctetes' arrow, and his mother Hecuba had a nightmare before giving birth to him. He once fled from a duel with Menelaus and later shot Achilles in the heel with the guidance of Apollo. He infuriated Hera and Athena by giving a golden apple to another goddess. For 10 points, name this prince who started the Trojan War by fleeing with Helen after choosing Aphrodite as the most beautiful goddess in his namesake judgment.

ANSWER: Paris

Result: 1066 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 52005

Question: One of this figure's sons was the king of Keos, and four of his sons by the nymph Pareia were killed by Heracles. This figure was believed to share one of his occupations with Aeacus, and he was killed in Sicily by King Cocalus, who poured boiling water on him while he was taking a bath. His son Androgeos was killed during an athletic contest in Athens, and one account of this figure describes him and Rhadamanthus as judges of the dead. The father of Ariadne, For 10 points, name this king of Crete who instructed Daedalus to build a labyrinth for Minotaur.

ANSWER: Minos

Result: 1067 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 52024

Question: In one story, this figure during a contest created three women from a sword while her opponent created five men from a necklace. This deity entrusted Ninigi with the Three Sacred Treasures, which were used to bring order to the world, and is worshipped at a shrine in Ise, where a certain sacred mirror is said to be kept. That mirror was used to lure out this deity when she hid inside a cave after her brother Susano'o threw a horse at her loom. For 10 points, name this sun goddess from Shinto mythology.

ANSWER: Amaterasu Omikami [accept Ohirume-no-muchi-no-kami]

Result: 1068 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 52039

Question: In his persona as the god of wind, this figure wears a conical hat and was romantically involved with Mayahuel. While intoxicated, this figure made love to his sister, an act which led to his self-imposed exile. He created mankind by adding his blood to bones retrieved from the underworld, and this god was exiled on a raft of snakes as a result of the machinations of Tezcatlipoca. His twin brother, Xolotl, was closely associated with the underworld. For 10 points, name this Aztec feathered serpent deity.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 1069 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 52054

Question: Anaxarete was turned into one of these after mocking the funeral of her suitor, who hanged himself. Hermes turned the sheppard Battus into this after he told his friends about the god's theft of cattle, and Laelaps was turned into one of these by Zeus. Phineus and his men were turned into these during a fight with Perseus, as well as the brother of Dictys, King Polydectes. Niobe was turned into this after Apollo and Artemis killed her children, and Perseus avoided turning into this by using a shield as a mirror. For 10 points, name this object, which everything that looks into the head of the Medusa turns into.

ANSWER: Stones [accept Rocks or other equivalents]

Result: 1070 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 52085

Question: This goddess is accompanied by her wild boar Hildisvíni, and this figure weeps tears of red gold in loneliness when her husband Od is absent. This deity is accused of engaging in sexual relations with her brother in one poem, whose title character stole one of her items while disguised as a flea. She takes half of those who are slain in battle to Fólkvangr, while the rest are taken to Valhalla. She slept with the four dwarves to gain the necklace Brísingamen. For 10 points, name this Norse goddess of love and beauty and the sister of Freyr.

ANSWER: Freya [accept Freyja; do not accept "Frey" or "Freyr"]

Result: 1071 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 52159

Question: This figure gave birth to Hedone and lived in a palace with invisible servants. This figure described her husband as a man who spends all day hunting in the mountains, and she later used a small cake to distract Cerberus. A river-god advised this figure to wait until noontime in order to retrieve some golden wool, and an oracle ordered this figure to be left on top of a mountain, after which Zephyrus took her to her palace. A group of ants helped her sort out a pile of grains and seeds, and she hid a knife and an oil lamp to identify her husband. For 10 points, name this woman who became immortal after marrying Cupid.

ANSWER: Psyche

Result: 1072 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2012 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 52179

Question: Through a series of exchanges, this figure is able to procure one hundred slaves for a single ear of corn, and he asks every bird for a feather in order to make a robe. By making it appear to be raining, this figure is able to trap a number of hornets for the sky god Nyame, which he exchanges along with a python, a leopard, and a dwarf for all the world's stories. This figure was defeated by tar baby, and he stored all of the world's wisdom in a calabash. For 10 points, name this West African trickster god who takes the form of a spider.

ANSWER: Anansi

Result: 1073 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 41851

Question: One talisman against these objects was the dried body of a kingfisher. Orphic mythology holds that these objects were used to avenge Zagreus after his abduction and mutilation. One of these objects was used after the Titan Iasius slept with Demeter at the wedding of Cadmus and Harmonia. These objects were once placed out of the reach of their owner, who was knotted one hundred times by rawhide thongs, until (*) Briareus set him free and he recovered them. Aphrodite used her girdle to divert one of these objects, saving the life of Anchises but dooming him to lameness. After he had accepted payment for raising Hippolytus from the dead, Asclepius was killed with one of these objects, which were also used to put a stop to Phaethon's ill-fated chariot ride. Apollo killed the forger of these objects, the Cyclopes, who created them alongside a helmet of invisibility and a trident. For 10 points, name these weapons thrown liberally by Zeus.

ANSWER: Zeus's thunderbolts [or storm bolts; or lightning bolts; or bolts]

Result: 1074 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 44239

Question: In Chinook mythology, the trickster Blue Jay finds several of these objects near his sister Ioi in the Land of the Ghosts and derives great amusement in transforming humans into them by singing. For all their evilness, the kappa are said to have taught mankind the art of manipulating these objects for therapeutic effect. These objects were sprinkled with blood in Quetzalcoatl's recipe to create the fifth and current sun. Prometheus once covered these objects up with a (*) layer of animal fat in order to make them appear more appetizing. One of these objects was used by Maui to savagely beat up the sun and to fashion a fishhook which was used to pull the Hawaiian islands out of the ocean. Deucalion and Pyrrha correctly interpreted that these objects belonging to Gaia were rocks, which they threw over their shoulders to create humans. An ancient Chinese divination practice involved observing the cracks formed on, for 10 points, the "oracle" variety of what body parts?

ANSWER: bones [accept jawbones and skeletons]

Result: 1075 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 41882

Question: This character's corpse had its genitals, ears, and nose cut out and strung under its armpits to prevent his ghost from haunting his killer in a fragmentary Sophocles tragedy. This character's head is whirled around by its hair and tossed as an insult by his killer, who lusted after him as soon as he saw him fetch water for his horses at a spring and killed him on the altar of a shrine at Apollo Timbraeus. After seeing a set of armor with a brooch pinned to it, this character realizes that he was betrayed by his lover, who promised to return to him in (*) ten days when she was forced to be exchanged for a Greek prisoner at the behest of her father Calchas. This character's love interest was changed from Briseis in The Iliad to a woman whose messages with him were ferried by his friend Pandarus. This man, who is killed by Achilles, is the romantic rival of Diomedes. For 10 points, name this Trojan who, in works by Chaucer and Shakespeare, remained faithful to Cressida.

ANSWER: Troilus [or Troilos]

Result: 1076 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 41962

Question: This hero cut off several of his enemies' tongues with a magic sword that ensured great success in all hunts, winning a contest after Cretheis accused this figure of rape. He married Polymela at the court of King Actor during his exile from Aegina for killing his half-brother Phocas. This man was squirted with ink from a cuttlefish during a wrestling match in which he won his wife, who changed forms many times to escape his embrace. On his namesake mountain, this man took part in a ceremony in which he received an ashen spear and the immortal (*) horses Balius and Xanthus. This brother of Telamon was allowed to court his wife after Zeus was disillusioned by the prophecy that any son born to her would be greater than the father. In some accounts, he was deserted by his wife after interrupting her attempt to burn away the mortality of their son. The apple of discord was tossed by Eris at this man's wedding. For 10 points, name this hero, the husband of Thetis.

ANSWER: Peleus

Result: 1077 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 44108

Question: Borrowing from a Catullus poem about a lock of Berenice's hair, the main character of this portion of a larger work gives an anguished speech including the line "invitus, regina, tuo de litore cessi." This episode includes a description of a shadowy elm whose branches contain many false dreams. During it, Deiphobus recounts how he prepared an unused grave. In a cathartic portion of this episode, the main character sheds tears of pity after seeing a woman run away to her husband Sychaeus. Long after passing through the fortress of (*) Rhadamanthys, the main character of this episode rejoins his men on a beach after exiting through a gate of ivory. In this episode, the main character hears about his lineage from his father Anchises. During it, the Sibyl of Cumae accompanies the main character after he goes to Lake Avernus and uses the golden bough. For 10 points, Book VI of the Aeneid contains what episode, in which the hero visits the land of the dead?

ANSWER: Aeneas's journey into the underworld [accept anything with Aeneas/Aeneid and the Underworld or Pluto, Dis,

Result: 1078 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 44147

Question: This character admits a desire to "pile delay / upon delay in these great matters" so as to "destroy both countries' people." By conjuring an apparition, this character saves an ally's life by luring him onto a ship and severing the moorings. This character impels Juturna to disguise herself as the officer Camers to break a treaty and prevent a duel from occurring. This character interrupts some memorial games by making Iris incite several women to burn a bunch of ships. This character sends Allecto to inflict madness upon Queen (*) Amata and drives Ascanius to hunt a stag belonging to Latinus's herdsman. Realizing defeat, this character demands that the Latins not be forced to change their name and their language. This character orders Aeolus to blow several Trojan ships off course, setting events into motion that result in the death of Dido, the queen of her favorite city, Carthage. For 10 points, name this goddess, the enemy of Aeneas in The Aeneid and the wife of Jupiter.

ANSWER: Juno [or Hera]

Result: 1079 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 44125

Question: This man purified one of his servants of the murder of an Elean named Iphitus. His wife was a daughter of Amphidamas, and thus a sister of Melanion, named Antimache. In one story, this man's daughter was a priestess of Hera in Argos until she absconded with an image of the goddess to Samos. In another story, Macaria offered herself as a sacrifice to foil an invasion led by this man and his herald Copreus; after this man's forces are defeated, he is killed by either Hyllus or (*) Iolaus, relatives of his most notable rival. This son of Sthelenus was born after Hera drove Eileithyia away from Admete and provided aid to his mother Nicippe. In appearance, he regularly ran and hid in a bronze wine jar and refused to accept the legitimacy of the cleaning of the Augean Stables and the killing of the Hydra. For 10 points, name this king of Tiryns who ordered Heracles to perform twelve labors.

ANSWER: Eurystheus

Result: 1080 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 44182

Question: In Kwakiutl mythology, this animal was once asked to spot enemy canoes, so he traded attributes with a slug but refused to trade back, dooming slugs to be slow. In Culhwch and Olwen, one of these animals directs Arthur's men to his ancient enemy, the Salmon of Llyn Llyw, when asked about the whereabouts of the child Mabon. The early Sumerian king Etana was granted a child for saving one of these animals from starvation after a serpent violated a truce negotiated by Shamash. In Norse mythology, a character in this form breaks his promise to allow an earth oven to cook and gluttonously consumes an (*) ox until Loki attacks him. That character, Thiazi, later snatches Idunn in this form, which was also used by Zeus to abduct Ganymede. The Aztecs searched for this animal perched atop a cactus when relocating homelands. For 10 points, name this giant bird that has a snake in its mouth on the flag of Mexico because of that myth.

ANSWER: eagles [prompt on birds until mentioned]

Result: 1081 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 44226

Question: One myth from this tradition describes a messenger with a red belt and purple robe who emerged from a chest, bearing five grains and three girls, each of whom married a demigod. One hero from this tradition was once cornered at a river while being pursued by enemy horsemen, but was able to cross on the backs of fish. This tradition holds that two heavenly men and two heavenly women were the progenitors of mankind, having been birthed by Mago. In this tradition, a tiger chased a pair of siblings who became the sun and moon. After passing a hundred-year trial in a dark cave, a (*) bear transformed into a beautiful woman on the last day in this tradition, in which the gumiho is a fox who can seduce men in the guise of a beautiful woman. Many myths in this tradition have different versions in the mainland and on Cheju Island. For 10 points, name this tradition, many of whose myths were created during the Silla and Goguryeo Dynasties.

ANSWER: Korean mythology

Result: 1082 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 44593

Question: This god granted the infertile King Harishchandra a son and demanded human sacrifice in return. In one story, Bhrigu is presided over as chief priest by this deity, who hands Arjuna the bow Gandiva after using it for one hundred years only to have it thrown back at him after the Kurukshetra War's conclusion. One story says that swans transformed from being black and white to just being white as a result of a blessing by this god, who assumes the guise of a swan to escape from Ravana. This god, in return for assistance in fighting demons that were tormenting him, assists Rama's plan to build a bridge to Lanka after being rudely summoned by the hero attacking his (*) domain with arrows and other weapons. This god is credited with upholding rita, or the principle of natural order, in the Vedas, which regard him as the only good asura. This rider of Makara is often syncretized with Mitra. For 10 points, name this Hindu god who rules the celestial ocean.

ANSWER: Varuna [or Baruna; or Waruna; accept Mitra until mentioned, I guess]

Result: 1083 | Minnesota Open | 2012 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 44599

Question: This thinker noted that a violet color that is "soft and lovely" to one person may be "dull and faded" to another in a discussion of the "form of finality" that marks objects as beautiful. Two of this thinker's aesthetic concepts are related to the Aristotelian "sensus communis," the community of taste. This thinker claimed that appearances have both a matter and a form, the latter of which does not exist independent of the mind. Lyotard wrote "Lessons" on the section "The (*) Analytic of the Sublime" from one of the aesthetic works of this man, who formulated the "transcendental aesthetic" in another work. This person divided subjective experience into the categories of the agreeable, the beautiful, the good, and the sublime. For 10 points, name this author of the Critique of Judgment and the Critique of Pure Reason.

ANSWER: Immanuel Kant

Result: 1084 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 31446

Question: This figure once eluded the amorous affections of a river god by using white mud to hide her own face. During the conniving uprising of Otus and Ephialtes she killed Gration, but during Typhon's revolt she fled from her home in the form of a cat. In another episode, the Cyclopes Brontes tries to rape her, which led her to rip a handful of hair from his chest. She ruthlessly tried to kill the mother of Arcas, but Zeus intervened and placed Callisto among the stars. Ovid records that Actaeon was eaten by his dogs after he was morphed into a stag because he watched this figure bathe, and with her brother she killed the children of Niobe. For 10 points, identify this daughter of Zeus and Leto, who is the goddess of the hunt.

ANSWER: Artemis [or Diana]

Result: 1085 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 31655

Question: Seneca's play named after this mythological figure contains a vivid account of the continent of Atlantis. Herodotus relates that with her own son, she went to country of the Aryans, who renamed themselves after this figure in her honor. In one story this mother of Polyxenus fled from the king she married after she tried to use wolfsbane to assist that king in unwittingly murdering his own son. The nail that stoppered the single vein of Talos was plucked by this granddaughter of Helios, who owned a chariot pulled by a pair of dragons. Flames consumed Glauce as a result of a rigged wedding dress received from this priestess of Hecate that gave the Golden Fleece to her lover when they met in Colchis. For 10 points, name this witch and lover of Jason.

ANSWER: Medea

Result: 1086 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 31687

Question: Upon learning of Branwen's impending marriage animals of this type were mutilated by Branwen's brother Efnisien. Aphrodite frenzied beasts of this sort to devour Glaucus alive, and Boreas once took the form of one to sire water-walking progeny. In a plot to delay the construction of Valhalla, Loki underwent a sex change and transformed into one of these creatures to distract another animal of this type, Svaldifari. The eighth labor of Heracles had him subdue four of these animals that belonged to Diomedes. For 10 points, name these animals that includes Ballius and Xanthos, which also provided the lower body to the centaur Chiron.

ANSWER: horses [or mares; or stallions; or equivalents]

Result: 1087 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 31708

Question: Hera convinced this man's daughter to demand the disguised Zeus to reveal his true identity. Zeus thunderbolted Iasion after he lured Demeter away and violated her at an event which this father of Semele attended. A group of soldiers swore allegiance to this guy even though he threw a stone in their midst and caused them to attack one another. At his wedding, Aphrodite presented his wife with a necklace that bestowed great beauty to its holder. He's not Jason, but this king served eight years of bondage with Ares after he killed a dragon and sowed its teeth into the earth, a task he took up after Zeus morphed into an eagle and abducted his sister. For 10 points, name this husband of Harmonia and brother to Europa, the founder of Thebes.

ANSWER: Cadmus

Result: 1088 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 13 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 31743

Question: A shield or a hammer belonging to this person could loudly beckon his men to come to his aid, and it is said that he will sleep in an underground cave until he is needed by his country. He let healing water slip through his fingers to exact revenge on an injured man who earlier stole this man's fiancee. The powerful stench of a spear helped this hero resist the hypnotic spell of the sorcerer Aillen. Fear Doirche cursed this person's wife after she spurned that druid's advances. This man's hunting hounds refused to bring down a red fawn and that doe reverted to human form and revealed herself as Sadbh. Sadbh bore him the legendary poet Ossian. He realized prophetic powers after sucking on a thumb he burnt while cooking a fish. For 10 points, name this Irish hero who ate the Salmon of Knowledge.

ANSWER: Finn McCool [or Fionn Mac Cumhaill]

Result: 1089 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 31466

Question: This figure bore a son who was simultaneously suckled alongside Telephus, and that son later joined the Seven Against Thebes. This mother of Parthenopaeus dispatched the lusty centaurs Hylaeus and Rhaecus, and she was presented a prize that signaled the end of King Oeneus's woes by a man whose life ended with the burning of brush. Either Melanion or Hippomenes made use of golden apples to trip her up, thus earning her hand in marriage. This figure was exposed on a mountain at youth by her father Iasus and survived by being suckled by a she-bear. For 10 points, name this huntress whom Meleager presented the pelt of the Calydonian boar.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 1090 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 31487

Question: This figure bore a son who was simultaneously suckled alongside Telephus, and that son later joined the Seven Against Thebes. This mother of Parthenopaeus dispatched the lusty centaurs Hylaeus and Rhaecus, and she was presented a prize that signaled the end of King Oeneus's woes by a man whose life ended with the burning of brush. Either Melanion or Hippomenes made use of golden apples to trip her up, thus earning her hand in marriage. This figure was exposed on a mountain at youth by her father Iasus and survived by being suckled by a she-bear. For 10 points, name this huntress whom Meleager presented the pelt of the Calydonian boar.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 1091 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 31510

Question: Before he was deified, the subjects of this figure placed all of the region's tax money in his burial mound. The Swedish Yngling dynasty claims descent from him, and in a challenge to out-create the sons of Ivaldi, the dwarves Brokkr and Eitri created this figure's steed. This god was forced to fight Beli with an antler because he gave away his automatic fighting sword to his servant Skirnir. He built the Temple of Uppsala, and like other gods he was worshipped at Uppsala. He rules over Alfheim, or the home of the elves, and he owns the golden boar Gullinbursti. His ship can fold down to fit in one's pocket and is called Skidbladnir. This husband of Gerd and son of Njord will fall to the fire giant Surt at Ragnarok after one blow. For 10 points, name this most beautiful member of the Vanir, a Norse fertility god.

ANSWER: Freyr [or Fricco; or Yngvi before "Yngling", prompt after; do not accept "Freya"]

Result: 1092 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 31541

Question: One source describes how this Greek figure claimed that all arts and sciences which humanity developed originated from him, and another story describes him being led into Mount Olympus by Athena secretly so he could extract a piece of charcoal from the sun. Chiron felt much pain after taking an arrow in the knee, so he willingly forfeited his immortality to this guy. He used a layer of fat to conceal a bag of bones to trick Zeus into picking the least appetizing portion of a sacrificed animal. Men were created from clay by this man, and birds will eternally pick at his ever replenishing liver for giving fire to mankind. For 10 points, name this Titan, whose name means "forethought," who is the brother of Epimetheus and is chained to a rock.

ANSWER: Prometheus

Result: 1093 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 31551

Question: In a fit of rage this hero slaughtered swans and stags and mounted them on his chariot. This man's modesty was abused to quell his anger as he was thrust in vessels of water after he averted his gaze from a group of bare breasted women. This figure demanded that his only son should never reveal his name and he killed that son by Aife despite warnings from his wife Emer. This father of Connla thrust a leather ball down the throat of a hound after a smith released it at a banquet for this man's uncle Conchobar. After that, this person adopted his more familiar name to replace Setanta, his given name. He wields a spear made of sea monster bones, the Gae Bulga. For 10 points, name this son of Lugh and victor of the Cattle Raid of Cooley, an Irish hero.

ANSWER: Cuchulainn [or Setanta before mentioned]

Result: 1094 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 31567

Question: An object belonging to this god allowed a hero to escape from the sisters Stheno and Euryale after the birth of Chrysaor. After Phaedra hanged herself and after some centaurs killed Hippodameia, this deity bound the pair of men who sought the hand of the infant Helen into his Chair of Forgetfulness. This god was handcuffed by a trickster and locked in his house for several days. Aside from imprisoning Pirithous and Theseus and giving Perseus his helmet of invisibility, this god completed the rape of his wife when she ate pomegranate seeds. That wife, Kore, later came to be known as Persephone. For 10 points, name this Greco-Roman god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Hades [or Pluto]

Result: 1095 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 31602

Question: The Hungarian astronomer Pannonius named himself after this hero due to his erudition. One consort of this figure disguised herself as a officer and convinced an army to kill Trojans after peace had been established. That figure, Juturna, is a nymph that guards fresh water. While known for sheltering Saturn once Jupiter expelled him from Crete, he is also known for his roles in presiding over transactions and other financial issues. With Camese he fathered the personification of a river that flows through Rome. This father of Tiberinus opened up a hot spring to repel an oncoming Sabine attack. From that point forward his temples were left open during times of war. For 10 points, name this two-faced god of beginnings and endings, a Roman deity who lends his name to the first month of the year.

ANSWER: Janus [or Ianus]

Result: 1096 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 31616

Question: The planet Saturn intended to sit for seven and a half years on this god's head, but this god piled rocks on it until the planet yielded.The Brahmin people failed to curse this god but even when some sages succeeded, the bear god Jambavan lifted the curse. Sushena tasked this deity with finding the Sanjivani plant so he carried the entire Dronagiri mountain over to the injured Lakshmana. Once he was doomed to forget his own abilities and once Indra thunderbolted this god's chin after he mistook the sun for a mango and tried to eat it. This figure set the island of Lanka aflame by using his tail that had just been burned. For 10 points, identify this friend of Rama who used an army of monkeys to rescue Sita from Ravana.

ANSWER: Hanuman

Result: 1097 | MUT | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 31644

Question: When two brothers washed ashore it was this figure who supported the one who did not become king, Agnar. This goddess directs Hlin to protect the people that this woman deems worthy, and this woman holds that power because she weaves the clouds and the fates of men. She is the only woman that can sit in Hlidskjalf and she resides in the hall Fensalir. A god disguised as the giantess Thokk overcame her acquisition of an oath from all worldly things that intended to protect her son from harm. An oversight in that oath allowed the blind god Hoder to kill the son of this goddess with mistletoe. For 10 points, name this mother of Baldr and wife of Odin.

ANSWER: Frigga [or Frigg]

Result: 1098 | MUT | 2012 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 31765

Question: After this man's followers failed to follow his instructions, Lampetia informed the gods what happened. In Book 10 of The Iliad he promised to not kill Dolon during the Trojan War, but he killed him anyway. This man is the subject of the most notable nostos, and he and his men are nearly killed by Laestrygonians. Palamedes thwarted this man's plot to sow salt in his fields to feign insanity. After being shown hospitality by the swineherd Eumaeus, a scar on his leg gave him away to his aged nurse Eurycleia. This son of Anticleia owned a dog Argus that died shortly after recognizing him, and he revealed his true identity before murdering his wife's suitors. For 10 points, name this king of Ithaca who returned to his son Telemachus and his wife Penelope after twenty years of absence.

ANSWER: Odysseus [or Ulysses; or Ulixes]

Result: 1099 | MUT | 2012 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 31781

Question: A man tied this deity's hair to beams so that when this god awoke, he would be unable to chase after his daughter's kidnapper. He once tasked that kidnapper with sitting in multiple rooms full of vermin, and this god spawned five men after biting a jeweled necklace. After this god's hair was pulled, he was banished to the district of Izumo after destroying a house of weavers. A washed nose set forth his birth, and this father of Suseri-hime turned a woman into a comb before using eight vats of sake to complete one of his more famous tasks. He received the "grass cutter" Kusanagi after the sword materialized from the dead body of the eight-headed dragon Yamata-No-Orochi, For 10 points, identify this Shinto god of storms.

ANSWER: Susano'o-no-mikoto [or Swift Impetuous Male; or Susanowa; or Susanowo]

Result: 1100 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 1.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 30426

Question: According to Saxo Grammaticus, this god was killed by the magic sword of a rival suitor who had stolen the food that was his source of power. In a riddle contest, this deity's father asked his rival what he had once whispered in this figure's ear. This figure is the father of another deity who ruled at Glitnir. This father of Forseti met his fate when the giantess Thokk refused a request from Hermod. Based out of the beautiful hall Breidablik, this god was burned on his ship Hringhorni. This figure was married to Nanna and was ultimately slain by the blind Hoder. His mother, Frigg, made all but one object in the world vow to never harm him. For 10 points, name this Norse god who was killed by mistletoe.

ANSWER: Balder

Result: 1101 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 53162

Question: This man dove into a lake to find a red ring for a young girl, but instantly became an old man after stepping out. He tricked a giant into thinking he had super-strong teeth by eating a normal griddle cake while the giant struggled on one with irons in it. Water poured from this man's hands had the power to heal wounds, but he let it slip through his fingers rather than heal his rival in love, Diarmuid. Credited with creating the Giant's Causeway, he also defeated the fire-breathing Aillen and gained the respect of his enemy, Goll mac Morna. While a student of Finegas, he accidentally gained the ability to receive knowledge by sucking his thumb. For 10 points, name this Irish hero who ate part of the Salmon of Wisdom.

ANSWER: Fionn mac Cumhaill [or Finn MacCool]

Result: 1102 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 53185

Question: Among this deity's children are a goddess who provides good eyesight and a goddess who weaves colorful clouds. This figure passed a series of 3200 trials, each taking 3 million years, in order to defeat a demon. This divine figure created the Milky Way to separate his daughter from a cowherd, but allowed them to meet annually on a bridge of magpies. He owns an orchard whose peaches grant immortality. This figure was originally a subordinate to one of the Three Pure Ones, and he once gave Monkey the job of stable boy. For 10 points name this ruler of heaven from Chinese mythology, named for a type of green stone

ANSWER: Jade Emperor [or Yu-huang; or Yu Di]

Result: 1103 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 13 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 53214

Question: After the fall of Troy, one man with this ability married Andromache and ruled a "little Troy" in Epirus. Helenus obtained this power through the instruction of his sister. The first humans to possess this ability owed their power to Themis. Two men named Mopsus possessed this ability, as did Manto. This is also the ability of a woman raped by Ajax the Lesser in Athena's temple who became the concubine of Agamemnon. Apollo gave this ability to a woman he loved, but later cursed her when she refused him. For 10 points, name this ability possessed by individuals like the Cumaean Sibyl, Cassandra, and Tiresias.

ANSWER: prophecy [or telling the future; or seeing the future]

Result: 1104 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 14 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 53237

Question: One of this author's works describes how the Polish Permanent Council followed up an open vote with a secret vote. He stated that "the question is not, Can they reason? nor, Can they talk? but, Can they Suffer?" in a work describing how mankind is governed by "two sovereign masters, pain and pleasure." Besides supporting animal rights in Introduction to Principles of Morals and Legislation and laissez-faire economics in A Defense of Usury, this author theorized a structure where inmates can be observed without their knowledge. The "greatest happiness for the greatest number" was thought up by, for 10 points, what English philosopher who came up with the Panopticon and theorized utilitarianism?

ANSWER: Jeremy Bentham

Result: 1105 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 14 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 53244

Question: After hearing a strange dream, this man told Euphemus to throw a clod of earth into the sea, creating the island of Anaphe. He is credited with founding the capital of Slovenia, Ljulbjana. He took a break on the island of Lemnos by sleeping with Queen Hypsipyle. By wearing a magic ointment, he yoked two fire-breathing bulls. After he and his men survived crashing rocks called the Symplegades and saved Phineus from the Harpies, he reached the region of Colchis, where Medea fell in love with him. For 10 points, name this leader of the Argonauts.

ANSWER: Jason

Result: 1106 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 15 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 53269

Question: After being exiled, this man became leader of the Encheleans in Illyria and sacrilegiously plundered a temple of Apollo. This hero served Ares as a slave for eight years. This man traveled to Samothrace as part of a quest that he and his brothers Cilix and Phoenix ultimately gave up on. According to a prophecy by Dionysus, this man and his wife became snakes as punishment for his killing of the snake that guarded the Castalian Spring. At his wedding, his wife received a necklace that brought misfortune on its possessor. This Phoenician husband of Harmonia sowed the teeth of a dragon to create the Spartoi, who populated a city in Boeotia. For 10 points, name this founder of Thebes.

ANSWER: Cadmus [or Kadmos]

Result: 1107 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 16 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 53287

Question: In one story, Tantalus had his friend Pandareus steal a golden one of these creatures from the temple of Zeus. Another of them, Maera, found the grave of Icarius. One of these creatures, who was owned by Eurytion and found on Erytheia, protected the cattle of Geryon before being slain by Heracles, while another had a tail and mane made of snakes. The Sibyl of Cumae prepared a cake made of honey to pacify one of them. Eurystheus hid inside a jar in fear of one of these creatures, whom Heracles captured in his twelfth labor. For 10 points, name this type of creature exemplified by Orthrus and Cerberus.

ANSWER: dogs

Result: 1108 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 17 | Question: 1 | Mythology | AmericanID: 53300

Question: This man once broke down into tears after listening to the bard Demodokus. He was ordered to found a shrine in a place where the locals would not recognize an oar. Years after this man plundered the city of the Cicones, he was slain with the spine of a stingray by his illegitimate son Telegonus. While on a night raid, this man and Diomedes killed the treacherous Dolon. This man caused the suicide of Ajax by arguing successfully for the armor of Achilles. He sustained an injury while visiting his grandfather Autolycus, allowing him to be recognized years later by his nurse Eurykleia. For 10 points, name this Ithacan hero, the husband of Penelope who spent ten years trying to return home.

ANSWER: Odysseus [or Ulysses; or Ulixes]

Result: 1109 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 17 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 53310

Question: This figure was cursed by the gods so that he could never use his powers unless reminded of them by another. By rapidly changing his size, this god dashed in and out of the mouth of Surasa, a demoness blocking his path. This deity once unearthed an entire mountain to bring a life-restoring plant and revive a friend. After the death of Vali, he became counselor to Sugreeva. Indra struck this deity with the vajra after he mistook the sun for a fruit and tried to swallow it. This son of Vayu helps a friend rescue Sita. For 10 points, name this monkey god, the companion of Rama in the Ramayana.

ANSWER: Hanuman

Result: 1110 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 18 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 53329

Question: In the Poetic Edda, Attila partakes in this activity before dying. A group of Arcadian shepherds of the oak cult uniquely performed this activity to honor Zeus Lycaeus. Atreus punished his brother for sleeping with Aerope by tricking that brother, Thyestes, into doing this. Humans turn into Wendigos by participating in this activity. In order to get revenge on Tereus, Procne tricks him into partaking in this activity. This activity is performed by Antiphates and his underlings, the Laestrygonians. For 10 points, name this action that Tantalus tried to trick the gods of Olympus into performing when he served them his son, Pelops.

ANSWER: cannibalism [or eating humans; or more specific answers, like eating a son, eating a friend, etc.]

Result: 1111 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 19 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 53348

Question: This figure had a cult centered at the site of his death at which girls about to marry would offer locks of their hair. This man was reborn and lived the rest of his life in the grove of the nymph Aricia under the name Virbius. This man was killed when a bull summoned by a curse emerged from the sea and frightened his horses. That curse was one of three guaranteed by the god Poseidon to this man's father. This follower of Artemis rejected the advances of a woman who then hanged herself, his stepmother Phaedra. For 10 points, name this son of Theseus.

ANSWER: Hippolytus

Result: 1112 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 19 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 53358

Question: On the advice of a one-eyed stranger, this hero chose his horse by driving a herd into a stream and seeing which one had the least difficulty crossing. He dug a series of trenches along the path a monster took to drink at the river in order to lie in wait to stab it. After obtaining the fragments of his father's old sword, he reforged them into a weapon sharp enough to cut an anvil in half. This rider of Grani killed his old tutor, Regin, after attaining the ability to understand birdsong. The wielder of Gram, this man was killed by Hogni for abandoning Brynhildr, whom he rescued from a circle of fire. For 10 points, name this hero who slew Fafner, the son of Sigmund in the Volsung Saga.

ANSWER: Sigurd [or Siegfried]

Result: 1113 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 2.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 30452

Question: This woman is the mother of a witch, who was turned into a bird for enchanting Zeus to fall in love with Io. This mother of Iynx spent most of her life in glens and said "Alas! Alas!" as a man plunged a knife into his breast right next to her. This woman was punished for entertaining Hera with long stories while mountain nymphs cavorted with Zeus. She was torn to pieces by Pan's followers after having turned him down. Earlier in life, this nymph pleaded "lie with me!" after a conceited youth rebuffed her advances. For 10 points, name this nymph who loved Narcissus and could only repeat what others had said.

ANSWER: Echo

Result: 1114 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 2.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 30462

Question: In Babylonian myth, King Etana freed one of these creatures so that it would guide him to the plant of birth. Another of these animals stole the cap of Tarquinius Priscus, but returned it, foreshadowing his later rule. Loki accidentally got his staff stuck in the body of a particularly greedy one of these creatures, which turned out to be a giant in disguise and forced him to steal the apples of Idunn. Vethrfolnir sits between the eyes of one of these creatures, the mortal enemy of the serpent Nidhogg. The Aztecs decided on the location of Tenochtitlan after seeing one of these animals on a cactus. For 10 points, name this non-vulture bird, one of which eats Prometheus' liver.

ANSWER: eagles [prompt on birds; do not accept "hawks," "falcons," or any other kind of bird]

Result: 1115 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 20 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 53383

Question: This goddess' sister was a dancer born from an egg she kept under her armpit. This goddess turned the poetry goddess Hopoe into stone after her sister failed to return within 40 days. She used astral projection to sleep with Lohiau, who ended up betraying her for Hiaka, the aforementioned sister. She digs craters across a number of different lands in an attempt to find a home, and eventually sets up shop in a location where Namaka cannot reach her. This goddess became the lover of a pig god who could change his size at will. She is believed to reside in Mauna Loa. For 10 points, name this fire goddess worshiped in Hawaii.

ANSWER: Pele

Result: 1116 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 20 | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 53390

Question: Lucky finds and successful communication with strangers were both attributed to this god, who protected Priam on his journey to beg Achilles for the body of Hector. This god's name derives from a pile of stones set up to mark a boundary. He laid a curse on the house of Pelops after the murder of his son, Myrtilus; the nymph Salmacis so loved another of his sons that the two became one creature, half-male, half-female. This god of the crossroads also carried a staff that he used to lead the dead to the underworld called the caduceus. This god was born on Mount Cyllene on the same day that he stole cattle from Apollo, whom he appeased by his creation of the lyre. For 10 points, name this Greco-Roman messenger deity.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 1117 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 3.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 30473

Question: In Celtic myth, one of these things has the power either to kill nine men or bring nine men back to life. Yam is killed by two of them called "Chaser" and "Driver," which Baal owns. Bhima unfairly uses one of these objects to bring down Duryodhana, and the Dagda owns another. Theseus steals one of these weapons from a lame son of Hephaestus, Periphetes. At the beginning of The Frogs, Dionysus is carrying one of these weapons in imitation of their most famous wielder, who used one to great effect after arrows bounced off the pelt of his target, the Nemean Lion. For 10 points, name this blunt weapon used by Heracles.

ANSWER: a club [or a mace, since some of the clues apply]

Result: 1118 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 4.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 30526

Question: This man fathered twins on Tyro, who murdered them, as part of an attempt to overthrow his brother Salmoneus. To thwart Autolycus' attempts at theft, this man wrote the beginning of his name on his cattle's hooves, and in some myths, he seduced Autolycus' daughter Anticleia, thereby becoming the father of Odysseus. This man told the river god Asopus that Zeus was sleeping with his daughter Aegina. When Zeus then sent Hades to punish this man, this king of Corinth handcuffed Hades such that no one could die until he was freed. For 10 points, name this trickster, who endlessly rolled a boulder up a hill in Tartarus as punishment.

ANSWER: Sisyphus

Result: 1119 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 5.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 30624

Question: In one legend, this hero saves his friend by donning the horse's skin worn by his defeated enemy, Guy of Gisborne. In another story, he is defeated in a fight by a potter, who forces him to trade clothing and possessions. This hero dies after he goes to his cousin, a Prioress, to be bled, but she treacherously lets him bleed out. This man is knocked into the water during a quarterstaff duel atop a bridge with the warrior who becomes his most famous companion. His allies include Will Scarlet, Much the Miller's Son, Friar Tuck, and Little John. For 10 points, name this English outlaw who legendarily stole from the rich to give to the poor.

ANSWER: Robin Hood [or Robin of Locksley]

Result: 1120 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 5.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 30634

Question: This woman married Rhadamanthys after going to the Islands of the Blest. Before sleeping with her first husband, she demanded that he avenge the deaths of her brothers by attacking the Taphians and Teleboans. This woman was allowed to give birth after her servant-girl Galanthis tricked Lucina into releasing her curse. In later life, she was persecuted by Eurystheus, but obtained vengeance by gouging the eyes out of his head. She gave birth to Iphicles by her first husband, Amphitryon, but gave birth to a more famous child by a god who took that husband's form to seduce her. For 10 points, name this mother of Heracles.

ANSWER: Alcmene [or Alcmena]

Result: 1121 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 52955

Question: In one section of this work, a lord receives a cloak illustrated with wasps that then come to life and sting the wearer. Early in this work, some gods rub their hands over seeds of coral and kernels of corn and are disappointed when the result is a race of automatons made of wood. Two characters in this work smoke cigars in the House of Gloom, which joins the Houses of Cold, Fire, Knives, and Jaguars in a series of trials culminating in them escaping head-snatching bats commanded by Camazotz. Father Francisco Ximenez saved the manuscript of this work, whose second half focuses on Hunahpu and Xbalanque, who defeat the lords of Xibalba in a ball-game. For 10 points, the Hero Twins appear in what collection of Mayan myths?

ANSWER: Popol Vuh [or Book of the People; or Book of the Community; or Book of Counsel]

Result: 1122 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 53071

Question: During one of these events, Acestes shoots an arrow that catches fire in midair. During another event of this type, Athena causes Ajax Oileus to trip into the excrement of slaughtered cattle and swallow it. The Trojan women set fire to their ships during one of these events; Achilles reconciles with Agamemnon by giving him a spear during another, in which he also awards Odysseus with a bowl and Ajax with an ox. These events dominate the 23rd book of the Iliad and the 5th book of the Aeneid. For 10 points, name these games celebrated for Patroclus and Anchises in honor of their deaths.

ANSWER: funeral games [or the funeral games of Patroclus; or the funeral games of Anchises; or ludi funebres; prompt on answers like footraces, archery contests, or other specific contests]

Result: 1123 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 53081

Question: This country's mythology includes a group of seven gods who sail on the "treasure ship" to hand out gifts on New Year's Day. Its folktales also tell of birdlike monsters able to disguise themselves as "mountain priests," whose name means "heavenly dogs." Humans can escape another monster from this country's folklore by bowing and forcing it to bow back, thus causing it to spill the water stored inside its head. Monsters in this country's legends include the tengu and the kappa. For 10 points, name this country which reveres kami like Amaterasu.

ANSWER: Japan [or Nippon]

Result: 1124 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 53104

Question: A statue of this god was carried on a barque during the Opet Festival. The oracle at the Siwah Oasis told Alexander the Great that his father was this god. Because the Romans identified Jupiter with this god, Iarbas is this god's son in the Aeneid. This consort of Mut and father of Khonsu was worshiped at the largest of the precincts of Karnak. This most important god of the Theban Triad was supposedly the father of Hatshepshut. This god, known as "the hidden one," was depicted with a ram's horns. For 10 points, name this Egyptian deity, who was syncretized with Re to form the supreme god of Egypt.

ANSWER: Amun [or Hammon; Amon-Re; prompt on Re; do not accept "Re-Aten" or other syncretisms]

Result: 1125 | NASAT | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 53128

Question: Two legends from this country involve retrieving a comb stuck in the forehead hairs of a boar and a battle in which the trees come alive to fight. Maids from one legend of this country act like their mistress ate her baby son after covering that mistress in puppy blood. A legendary figure from here was reborn from a witch who had eaten him with a newly-shining forehead. Many myths from this country were collected and translated by Lady Charlotte Guest in the Mabinogion. A mythical prince from here, Pryderi's father Pwyll, has a wife who is impossible to catch while on horseback. For 10 points, name this home of the bard Taliesin and the equestrian Rhiannon, which is no longer an independent nation.

ANSWER: Wales [or Cymru; prompt United Kingdom; do not accept "England"]

Result: 1126 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 30227

Question: One of these gods copulated with the horses of Erichthonius of Dardania. Several of them lived on the island of Lipara. Robert Graves claims that in the Pelasgian creation myth, Eurynome first had sex with one of them who later raped the Athenian princess Oreithyia. Although it was Hephaestus who created Pandora, these gods brought her to life. One of them was jealous of Apollo, so he changed the path of a (*) discus and made it kill Hyacinthus. Odysseus's men opened a bag containing all but one of them that was given as a gift by their ruler, Aeolus. Their names were Eurus, Notus, Boreas, and Zephyrus. For 10 points, name these figures that presided over the four cardinal directions of a meteorological phenomenon.

ANSWER: the four winds [or Anemoi]

Result: 1127 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 35631

Question: During a festival for this god, an arrow was fired at an edible likeness of him and those young men who ate his body had to serve him for one year. In that festival, a priest who impersonated his lieutenant Paynal ran and led a procession. After the consecration of this god's Great Temple, a rack was erected to display the heads of 20,000 humans sacrificed to him. He was often depicted with a blue and black face. This god slew the 400 stars, led by his sister (*) Coyolxauhqui (co-yol-SHAW-chee), after they tormented his mother for becoming impregnated by a ball of feathers. This son of Coatlicue was guided by an eagle perched upon a cactus to lead his people to their new home. For 10 points, name this "left-handed hummingbird," an Aztec war and sun god.

ANSWER: Huitzilopochtli [or left-handed hummingbird before mention]

Result: 1128 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 36207

Question: This man's life is once saved when he is told not to put on a poisoned mantle inlaid with precious stones. In a chronicle by Nennius, the capstone of twelve of his victories came at the battle of Mons Badonicus. The "Interpreter of Languages" and Mewr are two of six warriors sent by this man to aid Culwch in his quest for Olwen. This man's kitchens are kept by his (*) seneschal Kay. This man's father disguised himself as his enemy Gorlois to seduce Ygraine. Geoffrey of Monmouth popularized the stories of this man, who returned to his kingdom after hearing that his wife has married Mordred. He was given an object by the Lady of the Lake after having pulled a sword from stone. For 10 points, name this son of Uther Pendragon, the wielder of Excalibur and king of Camelot.

ANSWER: King Arthur Pendragon [prompt on "Pendragon"]

Result: 1129 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 24 | Mythology | NoneID: 36226

Question: One object in this place is covered in a purple ram's fleece that is used for rainmaking and is led up to by seven steps, each a different color of the rainbow. The Horae guarded the gates of this location, whose inhabitants liked the smell of mutton but didn't care for the taste. A hideous baby needed golden leg supports after he was thrown from this place for a second time. Located in Thessaly, this place employs (*) Iris as a messenger. Bellerophon became a crippled hermit after failing to reach this place via Pegasus. Hestia relinquished a spot to Dionysus in this place, where great quantities of nectar and ambrosia are consumed. For 10 points, name this mountain, home to the thrones of twelve chief gods of the Greek pantheon.

ANSWER: Mount Olympus

Result: 1130 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 36241

Question: The mound containing this object lies in the marketplace of Argos next to the body of the first widow to remarry. An army of two hundred led by Agenor was decimated with this object. The person who owned this object was tasked with obtaining it as a present for Polydectes's wedding with Hippodamia. Another use of this object enabled the fisherman Dictys to succeed his brother to the throne. After this item was obtained, Chrysaor and (*) Pegasus were born and it was mounted on the Aegis shield. Kept in a magic wallet, it was used to save Andromeda from a sea monster. A mirrored shield was used to turn this object against its original owner. For 10 points, name this snake-haired body part with a stone gaze, which Perseus got by decapitating a Gorgon.

ANSWER: Medusa's head [or other phrases that mean the same, like head of Medusa; do NOT prompt on or accept "Medusa" alone; prompt on "Aegis" until mentioned]

Result: 1131 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 13 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 43883

Question: One leader of these creatures gives Culhwch [CUL-wich] a set of impossible tasks before he can marry Olwen. One of these creatures, a king of Prydain, used a magic cauldron to smooth over an incident when his half-brother Efnisien mutilated the horses of Matholwch. Yet another once piled several rocks to put out his campfire, creating Mount Hood. One of them will protect Britain from invasion so long as his head is buried in the White Tower. During Ragnarok, one creature of this sort will emerge from (*) Muspellheim to set the world on fire. They include Bran, Surtr, and a man who created the Great Lakes by providing his pet Babe the Blue Ox with a watering hole. For 10 points, name these figures, including the lumberjack Paul Bunyan, known for their size.

ANSWER: giants [or fire giants on Muspellheim sentence; bemusedly don't accept a buzz with "lumberjacks" off Paul Bunyan clues]

Result: 1132 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 14 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 49714

Question: A golden structure in this place contains a circular arrangement of twelve high chairs and lies next to a building of solid silver. The center of this place is a field called "splendor-plain," or Ida. Apart from the meeting hall Gladsheim, this location contains a meadow where half of the deceased go, known as (*) Folkvangr. Its ruler sits on the throne Hlidskjalf, from which he can see everything in the universe at once. Loki once seduced the horse Svadilfari so that Hrimthurs could not finish building the walls of this location. This place is connected to Midgard by the rainbow bridge Bifrost. Also containing Valhalla, for 10 points, name this realm of the gods in Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Asgard

Result: 1133 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 15 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 49767

Question: The Garuda Purana extensively describes these events. In Japanese folklore, performing this activity properly prevents a reikon from becoming a yurei. Upon Rama's insistence, Sugreeva carries out one of them. At another of these events, Nanna suddenly dies and the giantess Hyrrokin is employed to push Hringhorni. At one of these events, the Myrmidons circle in their chariots three times and attendees partake in (*) boxing, wrestling, a footrace, and a contest for some armor. Those games occur in the one held for Patroclus. Hermod is sent to Hel to retrieve Baldr after, for 10 points, what kind of event, which in Norse myth was held after Baldr was killed by a sprig of mistletoe?

ANSWER: funeral ceremonies [accept word forms, especially funerary rites; accept funeral games at any point as well]

Result: 1134 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 16 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 49900

Question: This deity was honored at the Ekdysia festival after she turned the daughter of Lamprus and Galatea into a son. After the people of Lycia refused to let her drink from a lake, this goddess turned them into frogs. She was almost raped by a giant who is stretched across several miles in Tartarus, named Tityos. Along with her sister Asteria, this goddess was the daughter of Coeus and Phoebe. She and her lover had sex in the form of quails. For attracting the eye of (*) Zeus, Hera ordered Python to endlessly pursue this figure, who wandered the world until ending up on Delos to give birth. Niobe boasted that her children were more attractive than the children of this goddess. For 10 points, name this goddess, the mother of Apollo and Artemis.

ANSWER: Leto

Result: 1135 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 17 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 49923

Question: When this man retires from the battlefield, his infant child weeps in terror of his plumed helmet, at which this man laughs and takes it off. Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, and this man are the three pagans of the "Nine Worthies." His army is routed after his opponent, aided by Poseidon, knocks him unconscious with a boulder. Athena takes on the form of his brother, Deiphobus, to trick this man into his (*) last stand. After the death of this "breaker of horses," this man's corpse is dragged by a chariot around his home city in revenge for his mistaken killing of Patroclus. For 10 points, name this rival of Achilles, the greatest champion of the Trojans in the Iliad.

ANSWER: Hector [or Hektor]

Result: 1136 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 17 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 49925

Question: The "bodyless," or Ananga, reincarnation of Kama emerged after one of these objects destroyed him. Another mythical object of this kind is depicted in blue glass ornaments called nazar. A slingshot hit one of these objects at the second battle of Magh Tuiredh, where Balor was using it to paralyze the Tuatha de Danaan. The two or three (*) Graeae were made to talk by Perseus after he stole the one of these objects shared among all of them. The wedjat amulet of the ancient Egyptians portrayed one of these. A guardian lured to sleep by Hermes, Argos, had up to a thousand of them. In a fight Set stole one of these body parts belonging to Horus. For 10 points, name this body part of which Odin and Polyphemus the Cyclops only have one.

ANSWER: eyeballs [accept evil ey

Result: 1137 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 18 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 49939

Question: During the games in honor of King Pelias, this person won a wrestling match against Peleus. This mortal's son was killed by Amphidicus and was one of the Seven Against Thebes; that son was Parthenopaeus. One of her suitors was killed after his mother Althea burned the log linked to his life. This woman and her lover were harnessed to Cybele's chariot after the goddess turned them into (*) lions for having sex in her temple. She was raised by a she-bear after her father exposed her on a hill as an infant, and became Hippomenes's lover after he threw three golden apples to distract her and win a footrace. Since she was the first to wound the Calydonian Boar, Meleager offered her its hide. For 10 points, name this mythical huntress and follower of Artemis.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 1138 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 19 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 49962

Question: This god's daughter once used a love charm to make Io fall in love with Zeus and was transformed into a wryneck as punishment. This god swore off all clothes after being kicked by Hercules, who was dressed as Omphale, out of their bedroom. He spread his namesake frenzy among a group of shepherds, who tore Echo limb from limb after she ran away from this god. In a contest judged by Timolus, (*) Midas grew ass's ears by ruling in favor of this god against Apollo. River nymphs transformed his love interest Syrinx into some reeds, from which this god fashioned a musical instrument. He is equated with the Roman Faunus, had goat legs, and loved to play the pipes. For 10 points, name this son of Hermes, a satyr.

ANSWER: Pan [or Faunus before mentioned]

Result: 1139 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 19 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 49971

Question: On one holy day honoring this figure, followers offer bael-tree leaves and cold water, or draw three stripes of ash across their foreheads to commemorate the digging of the Well of Wisdom, or Jnana Vapi, in his holiest temple. This deity detected a fellow god's lie about reaching the end of an infinitely-tall tower of fire, since he was actually the tower, and removed the fifth (*) head from that liar, Brahma. Often depicted crushing a dwarf with one foot in the air, he is worshiped using stump-like structures called lingams. Though not Neptune, he wears a crescent moon in his matted hair and wields a trident. For 10 points, name this consort of Parvati who can incinerate others by opening his third eye, a Hindu Trumurti member and destroyer god.

ANSWER: Shiva [accept Siva; accept Maha Shivaratri until "this figure" is read]

Result: 1140 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 30261

Question: During the Gigantomachia, these figures killed Agrius and Thoas with their pestles. At Mount Nysa, they offered "ephemeral apples" to the doomed Typhon. At Delphi, one fewer than the usual number of these figures is worshipped. With help from Palamedes, these figures invented the alphabet. In order to save Admetus, Apollo gets these figures drunk. Known as the Parcae in Roman myth, these figures appear three nights after a (*) child is born. They own a spindle, a rod, and a pair of shears, which they use to manipulate the thread of life. For 10 points, name this triad, composed of Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, the incarnations of Destiny.

ANSWER: The Fates [or The Moirae; or the Fata; accept the Parcae before mentioned]

Result: 1141 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 20 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 49986

Question: This creature's remains were buried underneath a rock on the road to Eleaus. This creature lived at a spring named for the only Danaid who refused to kill her husband, Amymone. The final blow to this creature was dealt with a golden sword, whose wielder had to cover his mouth and nose with a cloth during the fight. The constellation Cancer came to be after Hera sent a giant (*) crab to assist this creature, whose venomous blood was used to coat the tips of its slayer's arrows. Iolaus used a torch to cauterize this creature's stumps. This creature lived in Lake Lerna and was killed after the Nemean Lion as part of Heracles's second task. For 10 points, name this many-headed monster from Greek mythology who could grow two heads back after one was removed.

ANSWER: Lernaen Hydra

Result: 1142 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 21 | Question: 24 | Mythology | NoneID: 50028

Question: Ashwatthama traded one of these objects for Lord Krishna's disc, only to find it impossible to lift. Dronacharya administered a test of concentration in which he allowed only his star pupil to use one of these objects because the pupil saw nothing but the eye of a bird. Rama won the hand of Sita by breaking one of these. Helenus prophesied that the Trojan War could only be won if one of these objects could be retrieved from Philoctetes, who used it five times to mortally wound (*) Paris. A drop of molten candle wax falls on the wielder of another of these items, revealing his identity to Psyche. This preferred weapon of Arjuna was used to kill the children of Niobe. For 10 points, name this weapon used by Eros to make people fall in love.

ANSWER: bows [or bow and arrow; prompt on "arrows"]

Result: 1143 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 22 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 52985

Question: This figure starts a fire in a cave after being refused a memory-enhancing ale and listening to long genealogies from Hyndla. In other myths, this parent of Hnoss and Gersemi poured a horn full of ale for the giant Hrungnir and wept tears of gold after Ottar's death. This figure presided over some sacrificial offerings after a war ended in a stalemate and introduced sorcery to the Aesir. This owner of the hall Sessrumnir once slept with four (*) dwarves to obtain the necklace Brisingamen. She uses a falcon-feather cloak to fly and owns blue cats that pull her chariot. To pay Thrym back for stealing Mjolnir, Thor wore bridal clothes to disguise himself as this goddess. For 10 points, name this Norse fertility goddess and twin sister of Frey.

ANSWER: Freya [or Freyja; be careful not to accept "Frigg," "Fricka," "Frey," or "Freyr"]

Result: 1144 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 23 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 53009

Question: In Greek mythology, the scarlet color of poppies symbolized the promise of this action, as did the whiteness of white poplars. After observing the behavior of a snake, Polydius used an herb to do this to a son of Minos named Glaucus. The cult of Dionysus held that their patron underwent this process yearly. A god who helped others perform this action was a son of Coronis snatched from a burning pyre by Hermes at birth. Out of gratitude for Admetus, Heracles helped (*) Alcestis undergo this action. Apollo became Admetus' herdsman after an incident in which his son performed this action on Hippolytus, which angered Hades. For 10 points, name this action repeatedly performed on others by Asclepius and by Persephone at the beginning of every spring.

ANSWER: resurrection [accept equivalents like come back from the dead, returning from Hades, returning from the underworld, coming back to life, etc.; prompt on "heal" or "healing"]

Result: 1145 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 23 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 53011

Question: In this work's final section, a woman is impregnated after eating a lingonberry and her son is crowned king after telling off a protagonist, who had earlier entered the belly of a giant to gain boat-building skills. The architect of the forests is summoned at the beginning of its second section, not long after a shattering duck egg results in the creation of the world. Longfellow borrowed its distinctive trochaic tetrameter for "The Song of Hiawatha". At the behest of a (*) witch from the north, one character in this work creates a magical mill called the Sampo. A tragic section of this work stars Kullervo, though most of it centers on Ilmarinen, Lemminkainen, and Vainamoinen. For 10 points, name this compendium of Finnish mythology edited by Elias Lonnrot.

ANSWER: The Kalevala

Result: 1146 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 24 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 53025

Question: One person with this name fell in love with a son of Simaethis and turned his blood into a river after he was killed. Another person with this name gave birth to Metharme. The former woman was loved by a creature who used a rake and a sickle to comb his hair and was at the center of a love triangle in which one of her suitors threw a boulder at the other, a son of Pan. That Nereid was loved by (*) Acis and the Cyclops Polyphemus. The most famous person with this name was named for her milk-white complexion; that mother of Paphos turned into flesh after a prayer to Aphrodite. For 10 points, give the common name of these women, one of whom was originally created as a statue by Pygmalion.

ANSWER: Galatea

Result: 1147 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 25 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 53056

Question: This ability is given by Poseidon to his lover Mestra, who uses it to thwart her father's plan to sell her to a suitor. Prophecy and this other power are possessed by the husband of Doris, who tells Heracles how to obtain the apples of the Hesperides. While in Egypt, Menelaus fought with another person with this ability, who told him that Agammemnon was dead. This ability was possessed by a person who herds a group of Poseidon's seals and can only give prophecy if he is captured and held. It is possessed by Nereus and "the (*) old man of the sea," Proteus. In order to forestall a prophecy that his children would be more powerful than he, Zeus tricked Metis into doing this and swallowed her. For 10 points, name this power, the ability to change form.

ANSWER: shape-shifting [or the ability to change form before it is mentioned; accept synonyms of the above; accept becoming an animal or synonymous things since that's what they often shifted shapes to]

Result: 1148 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 30378

Question: After persuading two scorpions to allow him into a tunnel, this man emerges on the other side and meets a tavern keeper who fails to dissuade him. A series of progressively decaying bread loaves proves that this hero failed to stay awake for seven consecutive nights. This man is caught sneaking into a bride's chamber, causing him to (*) wrestle a man who was tamed by having sex with a temple prostitute. Anu convoked the gods in order to punish this man's friend for his role in killing the Bull of Heaven, which was sent against this man because he spurned Ishtar. This two-thirds divine hero slew the beast Humbaba with the help of his wild-man friend Enkidu. For 10 points, name this king of Uruk, hero of a namesake Mesopotamian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 1149 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 30413

Question: Due to the similarity of this person's story and that of the Sumerian deity Tammuz, they were often syncretized. Women would plant flowers for eight days before the sun withered them away on plots of land known as this person's gardens. In one account of his birth, his father Cinyras fired an arrow at a myrrh tree which his mother (*) Myrrha transformed into, thus releasing him. A product of incest, this man was locked in a chest as an infant and given to Persephone, who lay claim to him for one-third of the year. The anemone was created from the blood of this man after he was killed by Ares in the disguise of a boar, despite his lover's admonition not to hunt wild beasts. For 10 points, name this lover of Aphrodite, a handsome youth.

ANSWER: Adonis

Result: 1150 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 30663

Question: According to Diodorus Siculus, this non-Greek god conquered and founded so many cities in India that Indians consider him a god as well. The Ikhernofret Stela preserves the mysteries of this god, for whom a great temple exists in the city of Abydos. A mob led by Patriarch Theophilus destroyed a Roman cult that worshiped this god and his wife, replacing him with (*) Serapis. This god entered a box sealed with lead and was thrown into a river, eventually ending up in Byblos. This god is depicted holding a flail and has an amulet around his neck. A catfish ate his penis, but the other thirteen pieces of his body were recovered by his wife after he was killed by Set. For 10 points, name this father of Horus and husband of Isis, the Egyptian god of the afterlife.

ANSWER: Osiris [or Asar, Asari, Aser, Ausar, Ausir, Wesir, Usir, Usire or Ausare]

Result: 1151 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 30977

Question: One figure from this location's folklore is a deformed beggar who carries a vapor-emitting calabash and walks on an iron crutch. In one story from this place, an oxhide-wearing herder annually crosses a magpie bridge to reunite with his love. This region's mythology says that a half-snake female figure created mankind from clay, while the world itself was made from the body of an 18,000-year-old-giant who hatched from an egg. In this country's mythology, an era of scorching heat ended when an (*) archer shot down nine suns. Dragons from this country lived in oceans and operated outside a strict celestial bureaucracy headed by the Jade Emperor. For 10 points, name this country, home to the mythical Xia Dynasty, whose mythology was folded into Taoism.

ANSWER: China [or Republic of China; or People's Republic of China; or Zhongguo]

Result: 1152 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 31073

Question: In Works and Days, Hesiod relates that Zeus destroyed the first generation of heroes by forcing a conflict over this person's sheep. This man's father-in-law Menoeceus leapt from the walls of the city he ruled to end a plague. This person speared Polyphontes to death after getting his foot run over by a chariot wheel. This man was spared the fate of being exposed upon Mount (*) Cithaeron, instead arriving at the court of Periboea and Polybus. This clubfooted person blinded himself with a pin during his catharsis. At a place where three roads met, he killed Laius and later married Jocasta after correctly answering "man" to the riddle of the Sphinx. For 10 points, name this Theban who was fated to kill his father and marry his mother.

ANSWER: Oedipus

Result: 1153 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 34075

Question: One story states that these creatures were born from the blood of Achelous's broken horn. Upon dying, several of these creatures turned white and transformed into islands in the sea of Aptera. They were granted wings after the abduction of their childhood playmate Persephone, but their feathers were plucked by the Muses after Hera coaxed them into a singing contest. Aphrodite saved Butes from these figures, from whom the (*) Argonauts were protected by Orpheus' music. One hero put beeswax in his ears and was tied to the mast of his ship to gain immunity against their power. For 10 points, name these maidens encountered by Odysseus, who sang so beautifully that ships crashed into their island.

ANSWER: Sirens

Result: 1154 | PACE NSC | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 35188

Question: One group of these creatures were controlled by a copper staff belonging to Phaethusa, whose sister Lampetia described a slaughter of them carried out by Eurylokhos. Eight of these animals were dragged by their tails to throw their owner off the trail by a fire-breathing monster named Cacus. Another set of them was protected by a two-headed offspring of Typhon and Echidna named (*) Orthrus. The infant Hermes stole a group of these animals belonging to Apollo. Odysseus sacrificed a group of them belonging to Helios, dooming his crew. A group of red ones originally belonging to a three-headed giant were sacrificed by Eurystheus after being stolen as part of Heracles' Tenth Labor. For 10 points, name these animals herded by Geryon.

ANSWER: cattle [or oxen; accept equivalent like cows, bulls, etc; accept more specific answers like cattle of Geryon or cattle of Helios]

Result: 1155 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Editors 4 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 44690

Question: In one story, a figure that this god appeared to agreed to sacrifice one yellow sheep in his honor every year. This figure once accidentally sold cakes with coins baked into them given to him by his wife. In another version, this figure was blinded by heaven after leaving his wife for a younger woman, and his sight was restored when he returned to his wife and realized his folly. He was given his position after committing suicide instead of becoming a hopping corpse. In one ritual, honey is smeared on the lips of a paper effigy of this figure, in order to sweeten his words. That effigy is replaced every year and he hears everything that goes on in the house and reports to the Jade Emperor. For 10 points, identify this Chinese household deity who protects families, usually hung above the stove.

ANSWER: Kitchen God or Zao Jun or Zao Shen

Result: 1156 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Editors 7 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 44968

Question: This man's daughter was hidden in a harp by her adopted father after this man's death. This man's mother Hiordis gave birth to him after her husband was killed in a duel with a god. One object owned by this man was pulled from the tree Barnstokk by his father. After drinking the blood of one of his opponents, this man is able to understand the language of birds, and he kills that opponent with an object given to him by Regin. That opponent guarded the gold used to stuff Otr's body, and that figure is a dragon named Fafnir. He was once fed a potion that made him forget one of his lovers and marry Gudrun, though he later saved that woman from a ring of fire. For 10 points, name this lover of Brunhilde, wielder of the sword Gram, son of Sigmund, and subject of the Volsung saga, a hero from Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Sigurd or Sigfried [do not accept Sigmund]

Result: 1157 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Editors Packet 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 44430

Question: This man's grandson refused Kali entrance into his kingdom, leading to Kali entering his crown and screwing up his thoughts. This figure killed an opponent after tricking him into giving up the armor he was born with, and that opponent used arrows that turned into snakes. This man acquired the supremely powerful Pashupata weapon after an incident in which he and Shiva killed the same boar. This figure was the only person who could pass a test involving a wooden fish suspended above a pool of oil due to his archery training under Dronacharya, after which he won the hand of Draupadi. This son of Indra and Kunti and slayer of Karna joined his brothers Nakula, Yudhistria, Sahadeva, and Bhima against the Kuravas at the Battle of Kurukshetra, where he was assisted by his charioteer Krishna. For 10 points, name this hero of the Mahabharata.

ANSWER: Arjuna

Result: 1158 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Editors Packet 2 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 44459

Question: One of this god's sons was thrown into the moon after being transformed into a rabbit. A temple to this deity contained four different pots, which would alternately freeze, rot, dry out, or help the harvest. The domain ruled over by this god contains a group of toads that guard cooking pots, a boiling spring containing a gigantic worm, and a cave containing a group of women who punish adulterous men. Dwarves, lepers, and people who died from dropsy would enter this god's domain. This god, whose older sister presides over salt, had a wife who was kidnapped by Tezcatlipoca, name Xochiquetzal. He later married Chalchiuhtlicue, or "she of the jade skirt". For 10 points, identify this Aztec god to whom children were drowned in sacrifice, the god of rain.

ANSWER: Tlaloc

Result: 1159 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Editors Packet 3 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 44675

Question: The city of Hecatompolis was founded during the journey to obtain these, and their captor conceived Scythes while dragging them through Hylaea. Alebion and Dercyon were killed during the retrieval of these objects. During the expedition to obtain these, one figure shot an arrow at the sun, leading to Helios granting him a golden cup. Cacus stole a subset of them by having them walk backwards. Their guardian was killed at the Anthemus river by a poisoned arrow. After Menoites reported them missing, their guardian spoke to his mother Callirhoe, who begged him not to pursue them. The herdsman Eurytion and the two-headed dog Orthrus were killed during their extraction from Erytheia, and after they were brought to Eurystheus they were sacrificed to Hera and the For 10 points, name these animals guarded by a three-bodied giant, the subject of Heracles Tenth Labor.

ANSWER: Geryon's cattle [equivalents ok, must mention Geryon and something cow like, prompt on "cattle"]

Result: 1160 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Editors Packet 5 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 44716

Question: One figure in this mythology travels through the star track, sun track, and moon track guided by the beautiful woman Den. The spiritual realm was created 3000 years before the physical realm in this system. In this system, the savior Sashoyant will be born to a bathing virgin. Wicked people are dragged by Vizaresh to the House of Lies in this system, and one group of deities in this mythology were created from divine sparks. In one story, Mashya and Mashayana emerged from a tree that grew from the corpse of the first man Gayomart. An evil figure in this myth sent Jahi to afflict women with menstruation and commanded the Daevas, while his good counterpart commanded the Amesha Spentas. For 10 points, name this mythology in which Ahriman and Ahura Mazda duke it out for all eternity, detailed in works like the Gathas and the Zend Avesta.

ANSWER: Zoroastrian mythology

Result: 1161 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Editors Packet 6 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 44753

Question: One member of this group had a wife named Evadne, who jumped on his funeral pyre. Two members of this group joined forces after a king promised them his daughters because a seer told him to marry them off to a boar and a lion. Thersander and Alcmaeon were members of a group that succeeded where this one failed, called the Epigoni. A clairvoyant member of this group was swallowed by the earth after an incident in which Tydeus ate Melanippus' brains. Including Capaneus, Parthenopaeus, and Amphiarus, this group sacrificed a bull over a black shield and swore an oath to Phobos immediately before rushing the gates of their target city. After this group's incursion, Antigone attempted to bury it's leader. For 10 points, name this group of warriors lead by Polynices, which attempted to take over the namesake mythological city once led by his father Oedipus.

ANSWER: The Seven Against Thebes [accept things like Polynices' army before mention]

Result: 1162 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Editors Packet 8 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 45184

Question: During a climactic battle scene, this figure borrows a sword from his charioteer, Metiscus, who would later be possessed by this man's sister. Earlier in that same battle scene, this figure slays Amycus and Diores and then hangs their severed heads on his chariot. This man was verbally challenged by the curmudgeonly Drances to whom he replied "charge me with cowardice when your hand has produced mounds of Trojan dead." Some of this man's supporters include Lausus and a man known as the "despiser of the gods", Mezentius. This man was once betrothed to a figure whose hair famously caught fire during a sacrifice, Lavinia. This figure's ensured his death when he despoiled the young prince, Pallas, after killing him in battle. For ten points, name this king of the Rutulians, the chief rival of Aeneas in the Aeneid.

ANSWER: Turnus

Result: 1163 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Editors Packet 9 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 45271

Question: A princess of Pokis named Chione once boasted about being prettier than this goddess, who struck her dumb in retaliation. This goddess once pulled the hair off the chest of a Cyclops as a child. This goddess slayed the giants Tityos and Gration and turned Arethusa into a fountain. This goddess was born on the island of Asteria. This goddess turned a woman Zeus had raped into a bear. A Queen who was the wife of Amphion boasted about being more fertile than this goddess's mother, leading to her death. King Oeneus forgot to worship this goddess, who angrily sent the Calydonian Boar to ravage his lands. In addition to killing Callisto and Niobe, this goddess turned Actaeon into a stag for viewing her naked body. For 10 points, name this sister of Apollo and Greek goddess of the hunt.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 1164 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: GMU | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 45584

Question: In one account, the first king of Lydia, Gyges, built a massive temple complex dedicated to the Oracle at Delphi and this deity. This deity who bore Zagreus was guided by two torches coming from the sky to escape from one area, and this deity also presided over the Grove of Obrimbo. This deity was called upon by the people of the Stygian shores to oversee the purification of Erynis and the spirits. This goddess was worshipped in the city of Sardis and in another account, this goddess was transformed into a mint plant by her mother. This deity was worshipped alongside her mother in a cult supposedly begun by Triptolemus, the Eleusinian Mysteris. She achieved her most notable position after eating a Pomegranite.. For 10 points identify this Goddess of Death and Queen of the Underworld, the wife of Hades.

ANSWER: Persephone [Accept Proserpina or Kore]

Result: 1165 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Maryland A | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 45616

Question: In the "Dream of Rhonabwy" Iddawc notes how there's confusion in the ranks of this knight as all his men rearrange themselves to get a better view of him. He can hold his breath for 9 days and his hands are said to radiate supernatural heat. Along with Sir Bedivere he rides on the ancient salmon Llyn Llyw to break Mabon ap Modron out of his prison. Peredur, son of Efrawg vows to prove himself after this knight insults him. When he was young, his squire couldn't retrieve his sword and instead drew one out of a stone to replace it, not realizing that doing so was a test to become King of Britain. For 10 points, name this son of Sir Ector, the seneschal and foster-brother of King Arthur.

ANSWER: Sir Kay [or Cai or Queux or Kex]

Result: 1166 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: UVA ` | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 45656

Question: This god cursed Tulsi to be reincarnated as an herb after she begged this god to marry her. After this figure's birth, Sani initially refused to look at him because of his wife's curse that his gaze would destroy anything in its path. This god once cursed the moon god after the latter saw him fall off his mount and break open his stomach, which was full of the sweets he loved to eat. This god married Buddhi and Siddhi after he won a race around the world against his brother Karttikeya by reading scriptures while his brother physically traveled. Vyasa dictated the Mahabharata to this god, who travels on a rat. This god, who travels on a rat, refused to dodge a blow from his father's trident while this remover of obstacles was guarding his mother's bath. For 10 points, name this elephant-headed son of Shiva and Parvati.

ANSWER: Ganesha

Result: 1167 | Penn Bowl | 2012 | Round: Yale | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 45699

Question: One of these creatures is always depicted opposite the bearded Gaulish god Smertrios, such as on the Pillar of the Boatmen. An Oceanian goddess who takes this creature's form is often called Julunggul or Yulunggul. The brain-eating heads of two of these creatures grow from the shoulders of a tyrant opposed by the smith Kaveh and by Fereydun in the Shahnameh; that ruler is Zahhak. When two of these creatures caressed the ears of Melampus, he gained the ability to understand animal speech. Eurydice was killed by one of these creatures, which made up the lower body of Cecrops. A mating pair of them was struck by the walking-stick of Tiresias, leading Hera to blind him. For 10 points, name this creature which is featured in the circular Ouroboros symbol biting its own legless tail.

ANSWER: snakes [or serpents]

Result: 1168 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 01 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 55884

Question: Because this man's killer lost a hand, the man who avenged his death did so while putting one hand in his belt. This man's mother gave birth to him at the same time as a mare gave birth to two colts at once, and in another story this man was successively placed in three barrels of water, two of which boiled. One object owned by this man had thirty barbs and was created from (*) sea monster bones. Cathbad slept next to this man's wife Emer on his wedding night. This man forced a leather ball into the mouth of a hound, after which he changed his name from Setanta. During one battle, this man defeated three different forms of the Morrigan after Queen Maeve invaded his home in an attempt to steal a bull. For 10 points, name this son of Lugh, wielder of the spear Gae Bulg, and hero of the Cattle Raid of Cooley, a warrior and protagonist of the Ulster cycle.

ANSWER: Cuchulainn [or Setanta before mention]

Result: 1169 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 39052

Question: Because this man's killer lost a hand, the man who avenged his death did so while putting one hand in his belt. This man's mother gave birth to him at the same time as a mare gave birth to two colts at once, and in another story this man was successively placed in three barrels of water, two of which boiled. One object owned by this man had thirty barbs and was created from (*) sea monster bones. Cathbad slept next to this man's wife Emer on his wedding night. This man forced a leather ball into the mouth of a hound, after which he changed his name from Setanta. During one battle, this man defeated three different forms of the Morrigan after Queen Maeve invaded his home in an attempt to steal a bull. For 10 points, name this son of Lugh, wielder of the spear Gae Bulg, and hero of the Cattle Raid of Cooley, a warrior and protagonist of the Ulster cycle.

ANSWER: Cuchulainn [or Setanta before mention]

Result: 1170 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 40294

Question: The final one of these figures disguised himself as a peasant and picked a fight in order to fulfill a prophecy and fight off an invasion. Two of these figures had wives named Praxithea, and one of these figures married his daughter to Tereus in exchange for help in a war with Labdacus. One of these figures fathered Herse, Pandrosus, and Aglaurus, who leapt to their deaths after defying orders and looking into a box containing another one of these figures, who was born when (*) Hephaestus attempted to rape Athena but impregnated Gaea instead. In addition to Codrus and Pandion, the most famous person with this title died when Lycomedes of Skyros threw him off a cliff, and that figure had earlier gained fame by defeating such brigands as Sinis and Procrustes. First held by Cecrops, for 10 points, identify this position held by such mythological figures as Erichthonius and Theseus.

ANSWER: Kings of Athens [accept equivalents]

Result: 1171 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 40368

Question: This figure is the one that suggests that Thor dress as Freya during the incident in which Thrym steals his hammer. In the Lokasenna, Loki states that this god must have a muddy back when this god attempts to shut him up. This man slept with figures named Great-Grandmother, Grandmother, and Mother in order to father Thrall, Karl, and Jarl, the progenitors of mankind. This god, who was the son of the nine (*) billow-maidens and dwells in a place called Sky-Mountain, owns the sword Hofund and the horse Gulltop. He will blow Gjallarhorn to signal the onset of Ragnarok, and this god has the ability to see infinitely far and hear the grass grow. For 10 points, name this Norse god who guards the bridge Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdall or Rig

Result: 1172 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 40481

Question: At one point, this man was succeeded by Deimas as the king of Arcadia. By an unknown mate, this man was the father of Calypso. One group of this god's children with the Oceanid Aethra were so distraught over the death of their brother, Hyas, that they wept until they became (*) stars. At one point, this son of Asia and Iapetus and father of the Pleiades attempted to escape from his fate by offering to go to the court of Eurystheus, but was tricked when his friend stated he needed to reposition his cloak. He helped Heracles obtain the apples of the Hesperides in exchange for a brief respite from his task. For 10 points, name this titan who was sentenced to hold the earth on his shoulders.

ANSWER: Atlas

Result: 1173 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 13-Finals 1 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 40610

Question: In Cyrus Macmillan's Canadian Wonder Tales, Glooscap gave a tobacco pipe to one of these creatures to reach Southland during his quest to bring the Fairy Queen Summer north. In Maori myth, Kae was killed after riding one of these creatures owned by Tinirau. An Irish monk from Clonfert known as "the Navigator" who made it to the "Isle of the Blessed"Saint (*) Brendanis popularly depicted as holding mass in the company of one of these creatures. Many Pacific Northwest cultures tell a story about the Thunderbird fighting one of these creatures. Its not a snake, but Hymir caught two of these creatures before he stopped Thor from landing the Midgard Serpent. In Inuit mythology one of these creatures was hit by a harpoon and became a narwhal. For 10 points, name this maritime creature that whose biblical appearance involves swallowing Jonah.

ANSWER: whale [accept narwhal before mention, prompt on "fish"]

Result: 1174 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 14-Finals 2 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 40640

Question: Robert Graves draws a comparison between the killing of this creature and the first love-task given to Cyenus, and after killing this creature its slayer was given honors eventually ceded to 360 Cleonensians. After its death, its killer rededicated a series of games held in memory of Opheltes to Zeus, and this creature killed the shepherd Apesantus. This creature cut one finger from its slayer and lived at the Tretus mountain. The son of Molorchus was killed by this creature, and its slayer convinced Molorchus to wait 30 days to (*) sacrifice a bull. After sealing off one entrance of its cave, its killer attempted to use arrows, a sword, and a club to kill it, but finally succeeded when Athena suggested using its own claws. Its killer would later wear its pelt as a prize. For 10 points, name this creature killed in Heracles first labor, a feline with an impenetrable hide.

ANSWER: Nemean Lion

Result: 1175 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 15-Extra | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 40648

Question: In one myth, this thing is created from the feet of Purusha. Vishnu once asks his naga servant Sesha to support this object using his hood. The boar Varaha manages to retrieve this from the bottom of the ocean after it is stolen by Hiranyaksha. Bhumidevi is one representation of this thing, which Sita returns to after Rama accepted her children. During the churning of the ocean, Garuda flew (*) around this object and dripped nectar onto it in four places. At the end of the Mahabharata, Yudhistria and his brothers climb Mount Meru and manage to leave this object, and in one story it was created by Brahma from half an egg. For 10 points, name this object in Hindu mythology which is balanced on the back of an elephant which stands on the back of a turtle, which lies underneath Heaven.

ANSWER: the Earth [or Prithvi, accept the world]

Result: 1176 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 39177

Question: Cassandra told one of this man's lovers that their union was futile, like planting seeds into sand. This man killed Corythus, not realizing that he was his child with the nymph Oenone. After a contest between his prize bull and Ares, he gave Ares a crown. During one duel, his opponent dragged him by the horsehair on his helmet, but Aphrodite saved him. Before his birth, his mother had a dream about giving birth to a torch, which is why Agelaus left him (*) exposed on Mount Ida. This man was killed by a warrior retrieved from Lemnos, named Philoctetes. After awarding a golden apple marked "for the fairest" to Aphrodite, this man was promised to the wife of Menelaus, named Helen. For 10 points, name this prince of Troy who shot Achilles in the heel.

ANSWER: Paris [or Alexander or Alexandros as he's called in some texts]

Result: 1177 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 39404

Question: One member of this race plants his foot in the main hall of his enemy, and dares the enemy's generals to lift it; none succeed. Another member of this race fought against Mayavi in a cave, and after his brother mistakenly blocks him into that cave chases that him out of the kingdom of Kishkinda. That king of these people was married to Tara and named Vali. One of these figures once ripped open his chest to show how (*) devoted he was to his friends, and that figure served under their king Sugreeva. One of these creatures carried an entire mountain on his back to bring a life-giving plant to his friend, and had earlier leapt across the sea to Lanka to determine whether Sita was ok. For 10 points, name these creatures which include the greatest devotee of Rama, named Hanuman.

ANSWER: monkeys or vanara

Result: 1178 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 39419

Question: One of this man's sons got Aegeus drunk enough to sleep with Aethra in order to become the maternal grandfather of Theseus; that son of this man was Pittheus. One of this man's bones was required to be at Troy for a Greek victory. Pindar's First Olympian Ode is a revisionist telling of this man's story and claims that his notable features and feats were because Poseidon loved him. This figure bribed (*) Myrtilus to sabotage a chariot axle to outrace King Oenameous for the hand of Hippodamia. This father of Chrysipus, Thyestes, and Atreus had an ivory shoulder after being used in his father's test of the gods' omnipotence. For 10 points, name this King of Pisa served by Tantalus as a meal to the gods, who also conquered a namesake Greek peninsula.

ANSWER: Pelops

Result: 1179 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 39564

Question: This figure stole purple bells from a demon who kidnaped the Queen of Purpuria. He drew a circle on the ground to protect against the shapeshifting White Bone Demonness and was banished by his magical instructor for turning into a tree in front of fellow students. He developed a weakness to smoke after being captured by Lord Erlang and spending 49 days in a (*) cauldron, after which he could see evil. This Keeper of the Imperial Horses carried out a Great Disruption of Heaven. This figure was born from a stone egg on the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit was quashed under a mountain by the Buddha until he was given a diadem controlled by a monk working for Taizong. For 10 points, name this mythological figure who was the senior disciple to a Sand Monk and a humanoid Pig and who once ruled over primates before going on a journey to the west.

ANSWER: Sun Wukong [or Monkey; accept Great Sage Equaling Heaven and Qi Tian Da Sheng; prompt on Sun]

Result: 1180 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 39565

Question: This character explains that he is at risk of a punishment so great that no arrow could reach the top; this character then receives an olive branch from his friend and has a vision of figures that he compares to gorgons. This character begs to a statue after being chased by figures who were ordered by a ghost to seize him, and this character is saved from them by a trial in which (*) equal votes are cast for guilt and innocence, which results in acquittal. This character's footsteps are followed to his hiding spot after his offering of two locks of hair is recognized. He pretends to be a Daulian when he claims that he is dead to gain entry into a palace with his friend Pylades; he then kills Aegisthus and his mother Clytemnestra in The Libation Bearers. For 10 points, name this brother of Electra and son of Agamemnon who names a trilogy by Aeschylus.

ANSWER: Orestes

Result: 1181 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 39771

Question: L.A. Constans claimed acceptance of new authority is seen through this character who claims to offer prayers to a hostile god and to be pregnant in Heroides 7. This character wove gold and purple robes used to cover a dead boy who lost an item depicting the Danaids. Rumor is personified as bringing news about this character to a Gaetulian king who then asks if Jupiter has any power. A mosaic of Penthesilea is juxtaposed to this character's first appearance in which she gives out (*) laws and work in a city that Juno is fond of. While she is out hunting, a storm drives her into a cave with a man who is later told by Mercury to leave her. This sister of Pygmalion and widow of Sychaeus was struck by Cupid disguised as Ascanius and asked for an "unknown avenger" against a man sailing for Italy before entering her funeral pyre. For 10 points, name this lover of Aeneas and Queen of Carthage.

ANSWER: Queen Dido of Carthage [or Elisa]

Result: 1182 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 39774

Question: In one story, Alexidamus won the right to marry this man's daughter Alceis. This man's tomb could be found at Lixus, and taking soil from it would cause rain to fall until the soil was replaced; in one story Quintus Sertorius opened that tomb to see if his skeleton was still inside. After his death, this man's wife gave birth to Sophax. This man's children include Iphinoe, who gave birth to Palaemon. This king of Irassa and wife of Tinga used the (*) skulls of his opponents to build a temple to his father Poseidon. This man poured hot sand on himself before one battle, and was finally defeated after his opponent lifted him into the air, severing his connection to his mother Gaia. For 10 points, name this giant who was invincible as long as his feet were touching the ground, who was defeated in a wrestling match by Heracles.

ANSWER: Antaeus

Result: 1183 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 39798

Question: This event had a cloth depicting Theseus and Ariadne according to the epyllion Catullus 64. One party to this event had previous social obligations cleared when a jealous Astyademia gets the daughter of Eurition, Antigone, to commit suicide. According to the "Themis variant," a King of Pthia and brother of Telamon wrestled the other figure in this event after a prophecy scared away (*) Zeus and Poseidon, the latter of which gave the immortal talking horses Xanthus and Balius at this event. At this event, Chiron gifted an ashen spear that was later used by a figure hidden at Skyros by one party to this event. One figure not invited to this event, Eris, threw the apple of discord to its guests. For 10 points, name this matrimonial event between the leader of the Myrmidons and a Nereid, the parents of Achilles.

ANSWER: Wedding of Peleus and Thetis [accept equivalents for wedding such as "nuptials", "marriage", "matrimonial union", and others; prompt on Wedding of Achilles's parents; prompt on Wedding of Peleus, but ACCEPT Wedding of Thetis as Thetis only had one wedding but Peleus had more than one]

Result: 1184 | Penn-ance | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 40243

Question: In one story, this man is seized by the god of death after picking up a drum off the floor of "the carpenter's house", and he serves as the night watchman for a group of shepherds temporarily. This man's existence is originally learned of because of his habit of destroying traps, and he was created after women prayed to the gods to stop their king from having the right of the first night. A sexual dream about a (*) meteor foretells the arrival of this man, who has sex for seven days straight with the temple prostitute Samhat. His friend makes a journey to the bottom of the ocean in order to retrieve a flower to cure him. He was cursed to die after being subdued in a wrestling match and then helping kill the Cedar forest demon Humbaba and the Bull of Heaven. For 10 points, name this wild man and companion of Gilgamesh.

ANSWER: Enkidu

Result: 1185 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 48973

Question: This god was forced to pay two pieces of red gold for each hair on an otter pelt in retribution for killing the dwarf Oter. In an eating competition, he lost to the personification of wildfire. In order to stall the finishing of a wall, he once turned into a mare, in which form he gave birth to Sleipnir. He was bound with the entrails of his son Narfi in a cave where his wife Sigyn collects venom to prevent it from dripping onto his face. That punishment was for leading the blind Hodr to kill Baldr. For 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 1186 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 49164

Question: One god of this area was the father of Ilmatar and wielded the Ukonvasara. That god's name is often translated as "old man" from the Finnish Ukko. This domain was also ruled by a god who fought his son Kumarbi and who forms a triad with Enlil and Enki. Along with the Sumerian Anu, another deity of this domain conspired with Thoth to steal moonlight to have 5 children with Geb, including Set, Osiris and Isis. Another god of this domain is forever separated from his wife by Atlas. For 10 points, name this domain ruled by Nut in Egyptian mythology and by the husband of Gaia, Uranus, in Greek mythology.

ANSWER: : sky [accept the heavens]

Result: 1187 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 49177

Question: Equipped with his father's crane-skin bag of weapons, he regained control of his people by stabbing himself in the forehead with a spear to stay awake. Immediately afterward, he threatened war with his grandfather and took that man's home for his own. In some stories, he dressed up as a baby to avoid fighting a giant. The druid Fear Doirich turned this man's most famous wife into a deer. This white-haired husband of Sadhbh ("sad-vuh") and father of Oisin ("o-sheen") sleeps in a cave below Dublin, and will arise when his hunting horn is blown three times. For 10 points, name this warrior-hunter and leader of the Fianna who once burned his finger on the Salmon of Knowledge.

ANSWER: Finn MacCool [accept Fionn mac Cumhaill, Deimne or Fingal]

Result: 1188 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 49188

Question: He died by drinking from the deadly spring of Tilphussa. He was cursed by Athena when he saw her bathing, but then was granted the gift of understanding birdsong. On Mount Cyllene, he hit a pair of mating snakes with his stick and in some myths, later became a prostitute. When he was called upon for his experience of both genders, he said that women enjoy sex more than men, causing Hera to strike him blind. For 10 points, name this Theban prophet who gave advice on Helios's cattle to Odysseus and revealed that Oedipus himself was the killer of his father Laius.

ANSWER: Tiresias

Result: 1189 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 13 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 49210

Question: This figure killed Taataka with a poisoned arrow and later freed Ahalya from a curse that had turned her to stone. He proved his divinity by stringing and breaking the bow Pinaka. One of this man's friends ripped open his own chest in order to show him the world. That friend once imprisoned this man's sons, Luv ("loov") and Kush, due to a misunderstanding about a runaway horse. This man exiled himself to the forest with his wife and his brother Lakshmana. He questioned his wife's purity after crossing a floating bridge constructed by monkeys to find her. For 10 points, name this avatar of Vishnu who slew Ravana to rescue his wife Sita.

ANSWER: Rama

Result: 1190 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 14 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 49233

Question: One of these had smelly hairs, each as thick as a spear. In other myths, that same creature challenged Djalfi to race against his mind and had Thor wrestle Elli, the personification of Old Age. That one "of the outyards" was the ruler of Utgard and once disguised himself as Skrymir. Idunn was kidnapped by another one called Thiazi. The first of these creatures, the grandfather of Bergelmir, sucked from the cow Audhumla. That one birthed two more from his armpits before his body was turned into the universe. Along with Ymir, other members of this race include Aegir, Loki, and Mimir. For 10 points, name these monstrous nature spirits who fight the gods at Ragnarok.

ANSWER: Jotunn [accept Jotnar, frost giants or equivalents; prompt on "giants"]

Result: 1191 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 15 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 49256

Question: He was known as the "Jade Turkey" as the god of pestilence. This son of duality seduced and kidnapped the goddess Xochiquetzal ("shok-ee-ket-zal") from her husband Tlaloc, and also tricked his brother into getting drunk. That brother had earlier overthrown him when this god ruled as the Sun of the first world. However, the two cooperated in the past to defeat Cipactli, who bit off this god's right foot. As a result, this god is depicted with a snake for a foot. He shapeshifted into a jaguar to destroy the world ruled by his rival Quetzalcoatl. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican god of the night who is sometimes depicted with a smoking mirror on his chest.

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca

Result: 1192 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 15 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 49577

Question: Early Egyptians thought that only these people possessed a Ba. Their names were written with a gold bird, and when Ra was one of these, Earth reputedly experienced a golden age. Their name referred to these figures' roles as priests, and they spent much time and money building temples to the sun. Isis poisoned Ra so her son could become one of these, and her husband ruled the underworld as one. Set and Horus are often depicted as crowning them with the red-and-white crown of Unified Egypt. For 10 points, name these kings, considered descendants of Ra and thus divine, who included Osiris and were famously buried in pyramids.

ANSWER: Pharaohs [prompt on "king of Egypt" or "ruler of Egypt" before "kings"]

Result: 1193 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 48997

Question: This figure was taught by Chiron, but accidentally shot him with a poisoned arrow while trying to drive away a herd of centaurs. His wife Deianira gave him a shirt poisoned with the blood of Nessus, leading to his death. This figure killed a Libyan giant, Antaeus, by lifting him from the ground and bearhugging him to death. This son of Zeus killed his first wife Megara and their children in a fit of madness. He kissed and killed Hippolyta for her girdle, and rerouted a river to clear the Augean stables. For 10 points, name this demigod who killed the Hydra as part of his Twelve Labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [accept Hercules]

Result: 1194 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 49005

Question: Although not Demeter, this deity attempted burn away the mortality of a son of Queen Astarte and is often depicted wearing a throne-shaped headdress. By creating a snake to bite Ra, this deity learned his secret name. She used her magic to create a golden phallus for her deceased husband. With the help of her sister Nephthys, she revived her husband by finding and reassembling his chopped-up pieces. She gave birth on the Nile River delta to her son, who would later battle Set. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the mother of Horus and wife of Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis [accept and give mad props for Aset]

Result: 1195 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 49041

Question: In Orphic poems, this god is eternally chained in the cave of the goddess Nyx, drunk on honey, while in other poems, he is freed and appointed king of Elysium. His namesake Athenian harvest festival featured mingling between social classes, reflecting his rule during the Golden Age. He mistakenly swallowed the Omphalos Stone in place of his son, who was spirited away to Crete. He created the Giants, the Fates, and Aphrodite in an act ordered by Gaia and executed with a sickle. For 10 points, name this Titan and husband of Rhea who castrated his father Uranus before he was overthrown by his son Zeus.

ANSWER: Cronus [accept Kronos; do not accept "Saturn"]

Result: 1196 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 49068

Question: According to some stories, this goddess destroyed a statue of her husband and shacked up with a servant in order to steal the gilding, before being killed. She owns a falcon cloak and has the power of prophecy, though she keeps silent about her knowledge. She was once shared by Vili and Ve when her rightful husband was away for a time. This fertility goddess once asked everything to refrain from harming her son, but neglected to ask the "harmless" mistletoe. For 10 points, name this wife of Odin and mother of Baldr.

ANSWER: Frigga

Result: 1197 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 49094

Question: This god is associated with the Rigvedic storm god Rudra, and his name contrasts with that god's epithet ghora, meaning terrible. The Arhanarisvara is a depiction of this god as half-man and half-woman, and the Harihara merges this god with Vishnu. The deaths of many devas and asuras who churned the oceans in search of Amrita led this god to drink the Halahala poison, turning his throat blue. In some stories he beheaded Ganesh and gave him an elephant head, and this god's second wife was Parvati. He is sometimes depicted dancing in a circle of flames to end the world. For 10 points, name this destroyer god of Hinduism.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 1198 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 49101

Question: This deity once changed his wife into a comb, and once went on a rampage during which he threw a flayed horse at his sister, scaring her into a cave. To kill a certain monster, this deity set out eight tubs of alcohol, then used a sword once used to kill the god of fire, the Totsuka no Tsurugi, to kill that eight-headed serpent, the Yamata no Orochi. To get back into his sister's good graces, he brought her the legendary sword Kusanagi. For 10 points, name this kami born from Izanagi's nose, the brother of Amaterasu and Shinto god of storms.

ANSWER: Susano'o

Result: 1199 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 49115

Question: This figure slew the Ljubljana ("liu-BLAH-nah") Dragon in Slovenia and drove away the Harpies from Phineas, who instructed him to release a dove to fly between a pair of crashing cliffs. His first wife killed the bronze giant Talos and the usurper king Pelias for him, but he left that wife for Creusa, who died after putting on a cursed wedding dress from his vengeful first wife. His most notable quest involved plowing a field with a team of fire-breathing oxen before sowing the teeth of a dragon. He was crushed to death by his own ship after Medea killed his children. For 10 points, name this demigod who led the Argonauts on their quest for the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Jason

Result: 1200 | Prison Bowl | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 49135

Question: The Lady of the Lake gave three of these objects to Lancelot which multiplied his strength. Odin summoned a ring of fire surrounded by these objects to imprison the valkyrie Brynhildr. Rome would not fall as long as the Ancile, one of these items owned by Mars, was preserved. After betraying the Romans to the Sabines, Tarpeia was crushed by these objects. Hrungnir stood on one after Thjalfi told him that Thor was underground. Perseus received a polished one from Athena, which he used to safely look at Medusa. Her head was then placed on one of these in Athena's possession. For 10 points, name these protective objects exemplified by the Aegis.

ANSWER: shields [accept bucklers or equivalents]

Result: 1201 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 40525

Question: In a medieval romance, this figure is the recipient of a gift of Christmas cherries. In some texts, this figure is the grandfather of Eliwlod, who is the son of Madoc. In Wolfram von Eschenbach's Parzival, he is the son of Brickus. Welsh texts describe him as the brother of Emrys and Custennin, but in a more famous appearance, his brother Constans is murdered and he is forced into exile with his other brother (*) Aurelius, until he returns to take vengeance on Vortigern. With Merlin's help, this man, who is best known from Geoffrey of Monmouth's History of the Kings of Britain, disguises himself as his enemy Gorlois in order to sleep with the latter's wife Igraine, siring his most famous son. For 10 points, name this father of King Arthur.

ANSWER: Uther Pendragon

Result: 1202 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 41068

Question: After he asks a god to conjure a flood in the Xanthian Plain, no one is able to quell this man's anger until a troop of women run at him backwards with their skirts hoisted up. Originally called Hipponous, this son of Glaucus and grandson of Sisyphus had to atone for killing his brother Deliades by serving the king Proetus, whose wife falsely accused him of (*) rape. This man also served Stheneboea's father, for whom he defeated a group of Carian pirates led by Cheirmarrhus. He delivered a message calling for his own death to King Iobates. He caused one creature to suffocate by putting a lead block on the end of his spear and aiming it down its throat. This man also dropped boulders on the Amazons from atop a steed he tamed with the help of a golden bridle he received from Athena. For 10 points, name this hero who killed the Chimera and tried to fly to Mount Olympus on Pegasus.

ANSWER: Bellerophon

Result: 1203 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 41404

Question: When this male god's son and an old man were given the chance to become the new sun by jumping into a bonfire, this god's son was too afraid, and instead became the moon. Instead of being cremated, people who were bound for this god's domains were buried with seeds in their faces and blue paint on their foreheads. This god was the third sun until the Dark Mirror stole his first (*) wife, which forced him to wallow in despair until he blew up; however, he later married Chalchiuhtlicue. This god, who demanded child sacrifices, was initially married to Xochiquetzal. At one of this god's shrines could also be found four pitchers of water, each of which meant a different fate for crops, and he was associated with the four corners of the universe. His Mayan equivalent was Chaac. For 10 points, name this Aztec god of lightning and rain.

ANSWER: Tlaloc

Result: 1204 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 12 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 41575

Question: This deity had a cult center at a location whose name means "place of pillars," which included a sacred stone which was said to be the dwelling place of a long-beaked bird with a two-feathered crest, the Bennu bird. He's not Apis, but one aspect of this deity was the Mnevis bull. One aspect of this deity was a ram-headed god named Auf who fights off the creatures of the Underworld. When this deity aged, he began to (*) drool, and Isis made a poisonous serpent out of his saliva, which bit him, forcing him to tell Isis his real name. He is protected by a snake-headed man named Mehen and he travels on a ship known as Semktet or Matet, which his nemesis Apep tries to swallow. Sometimes combined with Atum, he had a cult center at Heliopolis. For 10 points, name this Egyptian sun god.

ANSWER: Ra [or Re; accept Amon-Ra or Atum-Ra]

Result: 1205 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 40546

Question: In Hurrian myth, Kumarbi performs this action on his father Anu before spitting on the ground. Skadi refuses to laugh until Loki makes a goat perform this action on him. The Galli underwent this action because they are the priests of a (*) shepherd who performed this action on himself, Attis. The priests of Attis's consort, Cybele, also dressed up as women before they performed this action. After beheading Brahma, Shiva is cursed to undergo this process, which later causes havoc until sages are taught how to worship the linga. Probably the most well known example of this action was performed with a sickle and resulted in the birth of Aphrodite from some white foam. For 10 points, name this painful action that Cronus performed on Uranus.

ANSWER: castration [be generous; accept obvious equivalents like genital mutilation, especially since Loki didn't actually lose the function of his testicles]

Result: 1206 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 40558

Question: One of these beings received Hrimfaxi to pull her wagon across the sky; that being was the personification of night, named Nott. Two of them, Greip and Gjalp, broke their backs trying to lift a god in his chair. In the Eddas, one of them is responsible for hanging the poisonous snake over a bound Loki. The servant Skirnir was dispatched to woo one of them, (*) Gerd, on behalf of his master. One of these creatures who survived the flooding of earth was Bergelmir. One of them was forced to choose her husband based only on the beauty of his feet after she sought revenge for the death of her father Thiassi. One of them named Utgard-Loki tricked Thor into drinking from the sea when Thor visited his realm. One class of them lives in the icy realm of Niflheim. For 10 points, name these creatures of Norse myth whose "frost" types include Ymir and who live in Jötunheimar.

ANSWER: giants [accept jötunn or jötnar before "Jötunheimar"; do not accept or prompt on "frost giants"]

Result: 1207 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 40814

Question: Athena used an ointment of ambrosia to clean the face of this figure and also made this figure taller and more regal. The Naiad Periboea and Icarius were parents to this figure, whose sister Iphthime appears in a dream. In one tradition, this figure married her husband's illegitimate son Telegonus with whom she has a son Italus. She has a dream where an eagle attacks twenty geese. She performs a test by ordering her servant to move a (*) bed, which is impossible since one of its legs is a living olive tree. She is pursued by men such as Eurymachus, Agelaus, and Antinous. She weaves and unweaves a burial shroud to delay the advances of her 108 suitors until her husband's return. Telemachus was the son of, for 10 points, what wife of Odysseus?

ANSWER: Penelope

Result: 1208 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 40843

Question: In one myth of these people, a ribbon is used to make a tree admire itself so that it cannot block the path of a girl; that girl later throws a towel that transforms into a river at another figure, and a mouse warns that girl not to go see her aunt. The Hypatian Codex is an important source for these people's mythology. Three riders representing Day, Sun, and Night accompany a major figure from the stories of these people. In another myth of these people, a hare contains a (*) duck that has an egg inside it; that egg contains a needle with the soul of one figure, which is why he is essentially impossible to kill. Bulat the Brave defeated Koshchei the Deathless, who is sometimes considered to be the male version of another figure, who is a hag who lives in a hut that is elevated by chicken legs. For 10 points, name these people who believed in stories about Baba Yaga.

ANSWER: Slavs [accept Russians; accept other Slavic groups like Polish, Czech, etc.]

Result: 1209 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 40853

Question: In a popular koan, an old man demonstrates that the enlightened man is not subject to the law of causation by turning into one of these animals for five hundred rebirths. In Korean myth, evil versions of them are said to feed on human livers or hearts to survive. In Chinese folklore, Daji is possessed by one of these animals. The aforementioned evil versions of them are known as kumiho and huli jing, respectively, and are often depicted with nine (*) tails. In Japanese myth, they are associated with Inari, and demonic versions of them can shapeshift and are called kitsune. In Greek myth, Laelaps chases the Teumessian one of these creatures, which is uncatchable. For 10 points, name these animals which are represented in western European folklore by the crafty Reynard.

ANSWER: foxes

Result: 1210 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 40878

Question: In William Blake's mythological Book of Thel, Thel's motto asks if this creature knows "what is in the pit, or wilt though go ask the mole?" In the Kalevala, after Vainamoinen clears a field of all but one of its trees, one of these creatures questions his action and then bursts into flames. Later, after Vainamoinen steals the Sampo, the hag Louhi dons a costume resembling one of these creatures to chase him. In the Mabinogion, after Blodeuwedd betrays (*) Lleu Llaw Gyffes, Lleu transforms into one of these animals until Gwydion finds Lleu crying in a tree. The archenemy of the Nagas, Vishnu's mount Garuda, is usually depicted as one of these animals, another of which was seen eating a snake to signal the settling of the Aztec people. One of these creatures is traditionally said to have kidnapped Ganymede. For 10 points, name these majestic birds, one of which chills out with a hawk atop Yggdrasil.

ANSWER: eagles [do not accept "hawks"]

Result: 1211 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 7 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 40897

Question: After three maidens spill black, white and red milk on the ground, this man takes some of the milk and tells it that he's going to introduce it to its brother, which won't hurt him. Later, this man sends a bee to fetch him mead, and while the bee's away a wasp comes and taints his water with the secret hates of a frog, which makes this man's weapons break their promises. To win the hand of his first wife, this man must (*) plow a field full of vipers and catch a bear and a pike. When that wife dies because of Kullervo's curse, this man creates a new wife out of gold. He is better known for creating a device that could produce gold, salt and corn from nothing, the Sampo. For 10 points, name this man who forged the heavens, a smith in the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Ilmarinen

Result: 1212 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 40918

Question: According to one account, a warrior used a sword called Thousand Birds to either cut down this deity or one of his cohort. One close companion of this god can be seen in the form of a badger, weasel or blue-and-white wolf, and often leaves characteristic marks on trees. This god is usually depicted as a muscular red demon arrayed in a tiger skin. The aforementioned weasel companion of this god is also known to hide in human (*) navels when agitated, which then forces this god to eat those navels, out of concern for his friend's well-being. In depictions of this god, he is often surrounded by drums. For 10 points, name this god who repelled the Mongol invasions of Japan with the help of his brother Fujin, in his capacity as the kami of thunder and lightning.

ANSWER: Raijin [also accept Raiden]

Result: 1213 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 40939

Question: In Central American folklore, black and white versions of these creatures called cadejos fight at night for drunkards' souls. Surma is one of these creatures in Finnish myth, and is said to use its snake-like tail and petrifying gaze on anyone who trespasses by a swan that's impossible to catch. Matilda-of-the-Night is said to ride with Welsh versions of these creatures called Cŵn Annwn, which are associated with geese. Other instances of these creatures abound in Celtic myth, including old (*) shucks, gytrashes and barghests, and in the Mabinogion they are red. In Norse mythology, a blood-stained one kills and is killed by Tyr at Ragnarok. That creature, Garmr, guards the gate of Hel. Another of them is an offspring of Echnida and Typhon and has three heads. For 10 points, name these creatures which include Cerberus.

ANSWER: hellhounds [be generous; accept anything having to do with dogs or wolves and the underworld or evil]

Result: 1214 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 41612

Question: One of this figure's suitors was a soldier who convinced his compatriots to disguise themselves in enemy armor, and another was killed by Idomeneus. Those suitors are Coroebus and Othryoneus, respectively. This figure's twin brother, who told the Greeks the three conditions under which they could take Troy, was the soldier Helenus, and she herself gave birth to twins named Teledamus and Pelops. As a child, she became entwined with (*) snakes, who cleaned out her ears, while sleeping at a temple of Apollo along with one of her brothers. While taking refuge in the temple of Athena, she was raped by Ajax the Lesser. Taken as a concubine by Agamemnon, she was killed along with him by Clytemnestra and Aegisthus. For 10 points, name this woman who was given the gift of prophecy, but cursed by Apollo so that no one would believe her predictions.

ANSWER: Cassandra

Result: 1215 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 41619

Question: Plutarch wrote about how worshippers of this deity crush a plant called omomi in mortar before mixing it with the blood of a slaughtered wolf and carrying that mixture to a sunless place and casting it away. The Denkart complains about how the worshippers of this deity performed the rite of the "mystery of the sorcerers." This deity is associated with frogs because he is said to have created a frog which swallowed the world's water. This deity killed the (*) Just Man, which eventually led to the spawning of the human race. This leader of the daevas created a dragon that governs the storms and which possesses three heads. Azi Dahaka was created by this killer of Gayomart and son of Zurvan. For 10 points, name this twin brother of Ahura Mazda, the personification of evil in Zoroastrianism.

ANSWER: Ahriman [accept Angra Mainyu; accept Areimanios or Arimanius]

Result: 1216 | QUARK | 2012 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 41626

Question: The rishis Agastya and Vasishta were born after Mitra and this god ejaculated into the same golden urn, both after being touched by the apsara Urvashi. After a sacrifice he was attending is crashed by Ravana, Indra transformed into a peacock, Yama transformed into a crow, and this god transformed into a swan. This god's main consort, the goddess of wine, came into being during the churning of the ocean, along with this god's most well-known daughter, Lakshmi. Upon not receiving aid after having fasted for three days and three nights, Rama killed this god's pets and shot at him while he was in his elemental form until this god acquiesced and showed him a way to reach (*) Lanka. This god's monstrous semi-aquatic mount is named Makara. For 10 points, name this god of the sea, the consort of Varuni.

ANSWER: Varuna

Result: 1217 | RAVE | 2012 | Round: 1 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 59671

Question: This goddess alone requests Aeolus's presence at the feast of the gods, and she holds an oracle near Pagae. In one story, the intervention of Thetis and Briareus led to this deity being hung from the sky with a golden bracelet around her wrists. This goddess allowed a cuckoo bird into her bosom; that cuckoo bird ended up ravishing her. This deity bathed in the (*) springs of Canathus to renew her virginity and sent the hundred-eyed Argos to watch over Io. Ixion planned to seduce this goddess, which led to the creation of Nephele out of clouds, based on this goddess's image. Her children include Ares and Hephaestus. For 10 points, name this wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 1218 | RAVE | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 59663

Question: This god, along with Bragi, welcomed heroes to Valhalla, and in one form, he visited Ai and Edda, leading to the birth of Thrall. This god attempted to obtain the necklace Brisingamen while in the form of a seal, and owns the sword Hofund and the steed Gulltop. This deity fathered children for all three social classes in his disguise as (*) Rig, a mortal. This god had nine mothers and is known as "golden-toothed". He blows the Gjallerhorn to signal the beginning of Ragnarok, where he kills and is killed by Loki. For 10 points, name this Norse god who can hear the grass grow, the protector of Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdall (accept Bragi before he is mentioned)

Result: 1219 | RAVE | 2012 | Round: Replacements and Tiebreakers | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 59912

Question: One figure in this mythology has a serpent for one of his legs, and another deity has an owl on his head. Those figures are known only as "God K" and "God L". A creator god in this mythology, Itzamna, was said to be the father of Bacab. The Dresden Codex describes many figures from this system, including the rain god, (*) Chaac. This myth system's figures include Hunaphu and Xbalanque, who killed the bird demon Vucub-Caquix. This system's underworld is known as Xibalba, and this mythology features the "Hero Twins". For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican myth system partially deriving from the Popol Vuh, whose followers lived in, among other cities, Tikal and Chichen Itza.

ANSWER: Mayan myth

Result: 1220 | SCOP Novice | 2012 | Round: 10 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 54600

Question: In Sumerian mythology, Ea warned Utnapishtim [oot-nah-peesh-teem] about this event. Pyrrha [pee-rah] reached Mount Parnassus during this event with her husband, Deucalion [doo-kay-lee-ahn], after Zeus punished the world for its lack of piety. Another story about this event sees (*) Shem, Ham, and Japheth survive this event in a ship containing seven pairs of every clean animal. Noah built an ark to survive, for 10 points, this legendary event in which the world became covered in water.

ANSWER: great flood (accept great deluge; accept flood myths or deluge myths; accept flood narratives or deluge narratives)

Result: 1221 | SCOP Novice | 2012 | Round: 11 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 54617

Question: This legendary figure helped Igraine conceive her son and directed the building of Stonehenge. As a child, this man revealed that King Vortigern's castle has been built on a pair of sleeping dragons, and foretold that Britain will be ruled by (*) Uther Pendragon. Imprisoned by the Lady of the Lake, this wise man is sometimes credited with designing the Round Table. For 10 points, name this wizard, an advisor to King Arthur.

ANSWER: Merlinus Ambrosius (accept Myrddin Emrys; prompt on Emrys or Ambrosius)

Result: 1222 | SCOP Novice | 2012 | Round: 2 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 54162

Question: The armor of these mythological figures reflects light to make the Aurora borealis as this group travels through the sky with the Einherjar [INE-hare-yahr] on their way to Folkvang ["FOLK"-vahng], Freyja‟s "field of warriors." This group includes Gunnr and the (*) shieldmaiden Brunhilde, and they take half the warriors killed in battle to Valhalla as part of their duties as "choosers of the slain." For 10 points, name these female Norse spirits of the battlefield.

ANSWER: Valkyries (accept Valkyrja [val-keer-yah] or Valkyrjur [val-keer-yur]; accept die Walküre or die Walküren)

Result: 1223 | SCOP Novice | 2012 | Round: 3 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 54298

Question: As the creator of the Hippocrene fountain, this mythological figure was closely related to the Muses. He was stung by a gadfly as he attempted to reach the peak of Mount Olympus, and was captured with Athena's help in Corinth. This creature was born from the (*) severed head of Medusa, and he aided in the slaying of the Chimera after Bellerophon used a golden bridle to train him. For 10 points, name this winged horse from Greek mythology.

ANSWER: Pegasus

Result: 1224 | SCOP Novice | 2012 | Round: 4 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 54319

Question: Francisco Ximénez translated this civilization's collection of myths, including a tale of wooden people killed by a flood sent by Gucumatz. Another of this civilization's myths sees Seven Macaw defeated by Hunahpu [hoo-NAH-poo] and Xbalanque [SH'buh-LAN-kay], the (*) Hero Twins, in a ball game. The Popol Vuh records the myths of, for 10 points, what Mesoamerican civilization whose cyclical Long Count calendar resets in December, 2012?

ANSWER: Mayan civilization

Result: 1225 | SCOP Novice | 2012 | Round: 5 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 54331

Question: The Danaides [dan-AH-ee-dees] pour water into a vast pot in this location, where the Cumaean Sibyl brings Aeneas to meet Anchises [an-KIH-sees]. Pirithous is tricked into staying in this location, which contains the river (*) Lethe [LEH-thee], representing oblivion. Elysium and Tartarus are portions of this land. It is reached with help of Charon and guarded by Cerberus, a three-headed dog. Persephone is the queen of, for 10 points, what Greco-Roman underworld ruled by a namesake god?

ANSWER: Hades (accept Greek underworld or Greco-Roman underworld before that term is read; accept Tartarus before "Aeneas" is read; prompt on "underworld" before it is mentioned; prompt on "hell")

Result: 1226 | SCOP Novice | 2012 | Round: 6 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 54513

Question: This deity was tricked by Nephthys, and by her husband, who caused this god to become encased in a tree trunk holding up a palace in Byblos. His wife recovered thirteen pieces of this god after he was dismembered by his brother, (*) Set. This god held a crook and flail, and was the father of Anubis and Horus, who was born before this god became the lord of the dead. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god, the husband of Isis.

ANSWER: Osiris (accept Asar or Usire)

Result: 1227 | SCOP Novice | 2012 | Round: 8 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 54560

Question: This figure's father was Farbauti [far-bahw-tee], and his daughter is the keeper of the dishonorable dead. This god's wife is Sigyn [SIG-in], but through his lover, Angrboda ["anger"-boh-dah], this god is the father of three great monsters. Dripping (*) snake venom is used to punish this male mother of Sleipnir, who will break free to lead the giants at Ragnarök. He tricked Hodr into killing Frigg's son, Baldr. For 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 1228 | SCOP Novice | 2012 | Round: 9 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 54572

Question: Drops of this figure's blood became the giant Chrysaor [KREE-"sour"], and this figure's siblings were named Stheno [s-THEH-no] and Euryale [yoo-ree-AH-lee]. Athena cursed this woman for lying with Poseidon in her temple, and used this figure's face to decorate her (*) Ægis [EE-jis]. Perseus used his shield to see this woman as he killed her, since her glance could turn mortals to stone. For 10 points, name this only mortal Gorgon, a woman with snakes for hair.

ANSWER: Medusa

Result: 1229 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: Claremont A.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 29589

Question: In one poem, this figure pries genealogical information from a wolf-riding volva named Hyndla. In another, this inhabitant of Sessrumnir was offered alongside the Sun and the Moon as a reward. That reward is never claimed by the owner of Svaldifari since he is discovered to be a Jotun before he finishes building the wall around Asgard. In one story, this goddess helped trick Thrym and reobtained the hammer Mjolnir by lending her necklace Brisingamen. She lent her falcon cloak to Loki and rides a chariot pulled by cats during Baldr's funeral. For 10 points, name this daughter of Njord, a goddess who lives with the Aesir alongside her similarly named brother.

ANSWER: Freya [or Freyja]

Result: 1230 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: Georgia Tech A.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 29620

Question: An archaic Greek poem in which Iolaus and his uncle battle Cycnus is named for one of these. Eleven copies were made of one of these items belonging to Mars called the Ancile. One of these items called Svalinn sits in front of the sun. Joseph of Arimathea's blood is on one belonging to Galahad, and Lancelot's can grant him limitless energy. One belonging to Aeneas prophetically depicts the victory at Actium. Achilles' one is the subject of an ekphrasis in the Iliad. A huge lion-skin one is used by Ajax the Greater to protect Teucer, and Perseus uses a mirror-like one to slay Medusa. For 10 points, name this item, one of which featuring the head of Medusa is Athena's Aegis.

ANSWER: shields [or specific types such as bucklers]

Result: 1231 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: Georgia Tech B.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 29625

Question: This being was sometimes worshiped as Amphictyonis and was the mother of Adrastus' horse Arion. She turned Ascalabus into a lizard and turned King Lyncus into a lynx. In one story, this figure at first refused to drink the kykeon offered by Baubo, and she tried to burn away the mortality of Demophon. Erysichthon was punished with hunger for desecrating a place sacred to her. At the wedding of Harmonia, this deity has a tryst with Iasion, which leads to the birth of Plutus. She taught Triptolemus the use of the plow and the Eleusinian Mysteries were celebrated in honor of her search for her missing daughter Persephone. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of agriculture.

ANSWER: Demeter [or Ceres]

Result: 1232 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: Irvine.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 29660

Question: Hippothoon was the son of this figure as a result of this god's possibly incestuous seduction of Alope, the daughter of Cercyon. A temple to this figure from the Archaic Period is at Sounion in Attica. Hippolytus died as a result of a wish granted by this god to the son of Aethra, who slept with this god and Aegeus in the same night. This god gave the horses Balius and Xanthus to Peleus as a wedding present. Odysseus blinded this god's son Polyphemus. This god did not become the patron deity of Athens because Athena's olive tree was judged superior to the salt spring he created with his trident. For 10 points, name this brother of Hades and Zeus and Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 1233 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: Macomb.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 29674

Question: The demon Hiranyaksha was defeated by a god in this form. While disguised in this form, the mortal Ottar served as a goddess' mount. In addition to Varaha and Hildisvini, examples of these creatures include Saehrimnir, which is killed each night by the cook Andhrimnir and fed to the inhabitants of Valhalla. Brokkr and Eitri crafted one of these for Freyr named for its golden features. In Greek mythology, one of these creatures was slain in a snowdrift by Heracles, and another was sent by Artemis to punish Oeneus before it was slain by Atalanta and Meleager. For 10 points, name these creatures that include Gullinbursti, the Erymanthian one, and the Calydonian one.

ANSWER: boars [prompt on pigs]

Result: 1234 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: Minnesota A and MIT A.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 30118

Question: A giant sea turtle ate travelers that were tricked into touching the ones of the bandit Sciron. Talos died when the nail was removed from this part of his body. Scorpius stung Orion on this body part, also the site of Hercules being attacked by a crab while fighting the Hydra. Skadi selected her husband Njord based only on seeing this body part, because his were beautiful from the sea. Oedipus had his pierced when he was left to die as an infant. For 10 points, name this lower body part, onto which Hermes' wings are sometimes directly attached rather than to his sandals.

ANSWER: feet [accept foot, ankle, heel, or any body part below the knee]

Result: 1235 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: Northwestern A.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 30141

Question: In the guise of a hawk, this god was held in a wooden chest by Geirrod. This god had to give up Andvari's ring to cover up the body of Otter, a dwarf he accidentally killed. He assumed the guise of a falcon after Thiazzi persuaded him to steal Idunn's golden apples. In the Hudsdrapa, this god battles Heimdall in seal form, and another poem sees him hurl insults at a feast given by Aegir. After the death Narfi, Skadi bound this figure with Narfi's entrails underneath dripping snake poison, and earthquakes occur when this god's wife Sigyn doesn't catch the poison. He fathered Hel with Angrboda, and he is also the father of Fenrir. For 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 1236 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: Ohio State B.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 30194

Question: After this figure wins a duel at Griotunagardar, the volva Groa heals him until this figure tells her how he helped her husband across the Elivagar River. When this figure was carrying Aurvandil, he broke off a frozen toe and made it a star. This god got a whetstone lodged in his head when he and his servant Thialfi fought Hrungnir, after which only this god's son by Jarnsaxa was able to lift Hrugnir's foot. This figure goes fishing with Hymir for the monster this god duels at Ragnarok named Jormungandr. His chariot is pulled by a pair of goats. For 10 points, name this father of Magni and Modi, husband of golden-haired Sif, wielder of the hammer Mjolnir, and Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 1237 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: Rancho Bernardo.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 30216

Question: This figure was worshiped with the epithet Naios at a sanctuary called Dodona, where his consort was simply a feminine form of this deity named Dione. One of his offspring tried to rape Leto and was stretched out in Tartarus. In addition to fathering Tityos, this god also sired the man that killed the only mortal horse of Achilles before being slain by Patroclus. Hermes recovered this god's sinews after Typhon tore them out. Mount Ida on Crete was sacred to this god, who was raised there by the goat Amalthea after his mother Rhea hid him. For 10 points, name this father of Sarpedon and Heracles who was the Greek god of thunder.

ANSWER: Zeus

Result: 1238 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: RPI A and VCU.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 30279

Question: This figure's father originally married a daughter of Eurytion named Antigone and was later accused of raping Acastus. This figure healed a king of Mysia named Telephus, and he also avenged Antilochus by killing a son of Tithonus. In addition to slaying the Ethiopian Memnon, this man killed the Amazon Penthesilea. Because of a prophecy about this figure being stronger than his father, his mother wed a mortal. This man's armor was disputed between Ajax the Greater and Odysseus before it went to his son Neoptolemus. For 10 points, name this hero whose mother, Thetis, dipped him in the river Styx, protecting all of him save for his heel.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 1239 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: St. Anselm's and Alberta.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 30301

Question: This figure's mother spurned King Lygni to marry his father. This man is killed by Guttorm, the son of Gjuki and the sorceress Grimhild, who gave this figure a forgetfulness potion after this figure gave Andvaranaut to a woman he awoke by removing her helmet. This man used an anvil-cleaving weapon to kill a foe whose blood allowed this man to understand birds. Birds told this man that Otr's brother Regin would betray him. This husband of Gudrun won Gunnar a wife by riding Grani through the ring of fire surrounding Brynhildr's castle. For 10 points, name this hero of the Volsung Saga who used the sword Gram to slay the gold-grabbing dragon Fafnir and was the son of Sigmund.

ANSWER: Sigurd [or Sigfried]

Result: 1240 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: Stanford.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 30317

Question: As a favor to one of her priestesses, this figure struck that priestess' two sons, Cleobis and Biton, dead after they pulled a cart. In the Tonaia festival, the cult image of this figure was bound with branches from the lygos tree. After losing a bet concerning whether men or women enjoyed sex more, this figure blinded a Theban seer. In another story, this goddess had a servant guard a white heifer she received as a present from her husband. One of her sons fell for nine days after being cast out of Olympus either by this cow-eyed goddess or for helping her. Her children included Eileithyia, Ares, and Hephaestus. For 10 points, name this queen of Olympus and jealous wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 1241 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: UCSD and Berkeley.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 30340

Question: After falling in love with his uncle's wife, Cligès goes to this man for help. This man's wife was once kidnapped by the son of Bagdemagus, Meleagant. His father-in-law, Leodegrance, gave him a wedding gift that had earlier belonged to his own father. This man lost during a joust against the father of Percival, Pellinore, and broke his sword in the process. This man was raised by Ector, and his foster-brother Kay became his seneschal. The sheath of his sword grants immortality, but he was mortally wounded at the Battle of Camlann by Mordred, his son with his half-sister Morgause. For 10 points, name this husband of Guinevere who headed Camelot and wielded Excalibur.

ANSWER: King Arthur

Result: 1242 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: UCSD and Berkeley.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 30343

Question: This figure is the subject of a festival celebrated on the thirteenth night of the new moon, based on a hunter who threw down Bael tree leaves to receive the gift of wisdom from this figure. At his temple Pashupatinath, where he took the form of an antelope, his broken horn is worshiped. When this figure's two sons competed for a magical mango by racing around the world, one son simply circled around this god and his consort, declaring that they were his world. This figure dances atop the dwarf, Apasmara in the form of Nataraja. This god also beheaded his son by Parvati named Ganesh. For 10 points, name this blue-throated Hindu god known as the Destroyer.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 1243 | ACF Fall | 2011 | Round: WUSTL A.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 30359

Question: This man is often credited with slaying the husband of Laodameia, after which she "interacted with" a statue of that dead husband. This man married a daughter of Eetion and was the father of Scamandrius. This man won a duel with Protiselaus, but he exchanged his sword for a girdle after an inconclusive duel against the king of Salamis. He was the only one of the Nine Worthies from pagan mythology. This man's father negotiated for the ransom of his corpse after this man's corpse was dragged around the walls of a city, from which his son Astyanax was later thrown. For 10 points, name this Trojan prince who was Andromache's husband and the eldest son of Priam and Hecuba.

ANSWER: Hector

Result: 1244 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-ChicagoAFinal.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 38

Question: In one story, this figure's wife was trapped as a frog in a well for twelve years before being transformed into a beautiful woman. This figure won a sword for shaking a mountain; in another story, he recites the Sama Veda while trapped under that same mountain. This figure's son is ultimately defeated by the aindrastra, which was thrown by a man whose life was saved when Droganiri Mountain was brought to the battlefield. This being's brother sleeps for six months at a time and wakes up ravenously hungry; that brother is named Kumbhakarna. This figure stole Pushpaka, the chariot of his half-brother Kubera. Surpanaka, this being's sister, triggers the conflict that leads to this figure's death when she encourages him to abduct Sita. For 10 points, name this ruler of Lanka, a demon who is defeated by Rama in the Ramayana.

ANSWER: Ravana

Result: 1245 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-Editors1Final.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 96

Question: This man's marriage to Argia, the daughter of a king who gave him shelter, would make him the uncle by marriage of Diomedes, who was the son of Argia's sister Deiphyle. In order to secure the allegiance of Amphiaraus, this man bribed Eriphyle with the necklace of Harmonia. The position once sought by this man would eventually be achieved by his son Thersander, who also bribed Eriphyle with Harmonia's robe to persuade Alcmaeon to accompany him. Companions of this man included Capaneus and Hippomedon, and this man was one of two cursed for refusing to give his father shelter. Of those who accompanied this man on his most famous quest, including Tydeus and Parthenopaeus, only Adrastus survived, and this man's burial was carried out against Creon's order by this man's sister, Antigone. For ten points, identify this son of Oedipus and Jocasta and member of the expedition of the Seven against Thebes, who died fighting his brother Eteocles.

ANSWER: Polynices

Result: 1246 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-Editors2Final.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 126

Question: In Nahuatl, animals of this kind that had ritual significance were called Itzcuintli, while ordinary ones were known as chichimeh. According to the Popol Vuh, these animals teamed up with turkeys to kill the people of the second age who abused them. The man and woman Tata and Nene were turned into these creatures by Tezcatlipoca, who cut off their heads and sewed them onto their rumps while the Hero Twins sacrificed one of these animals and brought it back to life to impress One-Death and Seven-Death. The Maya believed these animals to be psychopomps and thus buried their dead with bodies of these animals, while the Tzotzil and Tzeltal held that a yellow one of these creatures mated with Eve to produce Indians. These creatures are most associated with a god who turned into a maize sprout, a maguey plant, and a salamander in order to elude Death. For ten points, identify these animals of Mesoamerican myth, most often associated with Quetzlcoatl's twin, the god Xolotl, and which in Incan myth were sacrificed to Ilyapa.

ANSWER: dog

Result: 1247 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-Editors4Final.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 158

Question: In the Apri hymns of the Rigveda, this deity is praised together with Ila and Bharati as one member of the triple tongue of the sacrificial fire. In the Jain tradition, this goddess is revered as Srutadevata, while in Vajrayana Buddhism she is the consort of Manjusri. One story about this deity tells of how she preserved the Vedas for twelve years by feeding her son on fish, and iconography associated with this goddess includes the vina, or lute, and her mount, the swan. Originally manifested as a river deity who was alternately the wife of Agni, Indra, or the Ashvins, this goddess was sometimes depicted together with Lakshmi and Vishnu, while certain Puranas syncretized this goddess with Durga. This goddess' most famous consort was so enamored with her that he grew faces looking in every direction in order to watch her constantly. For 10 points, identify this Hindu goddess, a patron of learning and the arts and usually depicted as the consort of Brahma.

ANSWER: Sarasvati

Result: 1248 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-Editors5Final.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 188

Question: Prior to this event, one participant in it had subdued another participant despite the latter's transformation into fire, water, a lion, and a serpent. One participant in this event had been selected specifically due to a prophecy that any child born to another participant in this event would become more powerful than his father. Taking place near Chiron's cave at Mount Pelion, this event saw the gifting of a golden suit of armor, a spear, and two horses named Xanthus and Balius to one participant, who was the brother of Telamon. This event was also the site of the place where Eris, having not been invited to it, dropped an apple engraved with the phrase "To the fairest," thereby precipitating the conflict which would see the eventual death of the offspring born as a result of this event. For 10 points, identify this festive event which saw the union of the son of Aeacus and a Nereid, the parents of Achilles.

ANSWER: wedding [or marriage] of Peleus and Thetis [both names required as well as some indication that a wedding was taking place]

Result: 1249 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-Editors6Final.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 197

Question: George Dumezil argued, against the thesis of Bernhard Salin, that this event was not based on any historical fact by pointing out that most accounts of it did not localize its participants, and that the exchange which followed it was extremely unlikely. According to one account, one participant in this event was known as "Heid," or "bright one," and was said to be "the favorite of wicked women," while another account of this event holds that its conclusion marked the birth of poetry. According to Snorri's Ynglingsaga, one group of participants in this event lived by the river Tanakvisl, and this event began with the attempt to burn and stab to death a sorceress named Gullveig. The dwarf Kvassir was born as a result of this event, described in stanzas 21-24 of the Voluspa, at the end of which both sides spat into a cauldron to signify a truce. For 10 points, identify this mythological conflict at the end of which one side gained Hoenir as a hostage while sending Njord, Frey, and Freya to Asgard.

ANSWER: Aesir-Vanir war [accept obvious equivalents that mention both parties]

Result: 1250 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-Editors7Final.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 212

Question: This figure's wife once betrayed him with a famous hero, with the result that this figure cast his magic cloak between them so that they could never meet again; that cloak, owned by this figure, was said to be able to take on any color. This husband of Fand once voyaged east with Angus, bringing back two cows whose milk would never run dry. This figure owned a sword known as "the Answerer," which could cut through all mail, a horse that could run over land and water, and a boat which could read its owner's thoughts and travel accordingly. Those items were said to have been brought by Lugh to the Tuatha de Danaan, who often feasted on this figure's swine, who could be eaten one day and revived the next. Said to dwell on an island located between Ireland and England and connected to the Welsh Manawyddan, for 10 points, identify this figure from Celtic myth, the son of the sea god Lir.

ANSWER: Mananan mac Lir [accept Manawyddan before it is mentioned]

Result: 1251 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-Editors7Final.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 226

Question: According to Pure Land Buddhism, this action is performed by King Enma, who is sometimes assisted in performing this action by the boddhisattva Jizo. In Mahayana Buddhism, this action is performed by Yenlo Wang, with assistance from nine others, while in Hinduism, according to the Taittiriya Aranyaka, this action is performed by King Yama. This action is described in chapter 125 of the Book of Going Forth by Day, in which the figure who carries it out is assisted by 42 assessors. In Islam, the time when this action is performed is called yawm al-din, and the process for carrying it out is explained in sura 99, while in Christianity, the parable of this action is told in Chapter 25 of the Gospel of Matthew, and alludes to sheep being separated from goats. Involving weighing the feather of Maat against a heart in Egyptian religion, for 10 points, identify this action in which the wicked are punished in the afterlife while the righteous are rewarded.

ANSWER: judgment of the dead [accept any of the particular equivalents mentioned in the clues]

Result: 1252 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-HarvardFinal.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 269

Question: In the Lamentations partly named for this figure, she recites, "O good King, come to your house! Your two sisters beside you guard your bier." The name of this figure is translated as "Lady of the Mansion," and the Pyramid Texts describe her as an "imitation woman with no vagina." This deity was often depicted watching Horus raise the djed pillar. She was responsible for guarding Hapi, one of the four sons of Horus, and through Osiris this goddess was the mother of a god whom she hid in the reeds out of fear of her husband; that son was Anubis. A daughter of Geb and Nut, this figure accompanied her sister in the search for and mourning of Osiris, and it is thought that she never had any children with her evil husband. For 10 points, name this funerary goddess of Egyptian myth, the consort of her brother Set.

ANSWER: Nephthys

Result: 1253 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-IllinoisAandColumbiaFinal.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 292

Question: Though he's neither Hephaestus nor Zeus, this entity has an alternative origin myth, in the Homeric Hymn to Pythian Apollo, according to which he was raised in a Cilician cave, possibly known as Arima, after Minoan Hera created him at Delos through parthenogenesis. Several modern scholars postulate the Hittite deity Illuyanka as his archetype while Herodotus records that the Egyptians syncretized this figure with Set. This being induced the gods to change into animals upon his approach, whereupon his greatest rival became a ram and fled. That rival was initially defeated, trapped in a korukos, and stripped of sinews, but, as recorded in Pindar's first Pythian Ode, this being was himself trapped when that rival escaped and broke up a flying rock. The resulting mountain was inhabited by one of Phorcys' daughters, this monster's consort. The offspring of Gaia by Tartarus, for 10 points, name this great enemy to Zeus and progenitor of Ladon, Orthrus, the Sphinx, and Cerberus, which he fathered on Echidna.

ANSWER: Typhon

Result: 1254 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-MichiganAFinal.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 327

Question: In the 48th stanza of Harbard's song, this figure's reputation is assailed for supposedly having a lover at home. While not Freyr, this figure's only recorded sons are a forefather of Norse rulers who is only mentioned once in the Prose Edda and a god of hunting and archery who appropriately lives in a dwelling named after the yew tree, Ydalir. This figure was once married to the giant Orvandil, who is thought to have fathered her son Ullr. Sometimes associated with the Valkerie Hildr, this goddess has the ability to transform into a swan and is considered to be the rival of the giantess Jarnsaxa, with whom this goddess' husband fathered Magni. The ship Skidbladnir and the spear Gugnir were created along with an item that would later belong to this goddess; that item was created after this figure's husband threatened Loki to replace her hair, which Loki cut off. For 10 points, name this Norse goddess, the wife of Thor who was known for her golden hair.

ANSWER: Sif

Result: 1255 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-MinnesotaFinal.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 341

Question: This deity was worshipped by the Persians until the rise of Zoroastrianism led to his role being usurped by the yazata Atar. The sage Vasistha condemned this deity's three sons to be born and reborn repeatedly; those three sons are Pavaka, Pavamana, and Suchi. This god revealed the identity of Puloma to a demon, causing the sage Bhrigu to lay a curse on him. He helped convey the sparks of Shiva's seed to the Ganges River, where they eventually became Kartikeya, as a result of which some myths call Kartikeya the son of this deity and his consort Svaha. Eight of the ten books of the Rig Veda open with hymns to this messenger god, a son of Prthivi and Dyaus Pita. Usually depicted with three legs and seven arms, he serves as the lokapala of the southeast and uses his seven tongues to lick up sacrificial butter. For 10 points, identify this brother of Surya and Indra, the Vedic god of fire.

ANSWER: Agni [accept Abhimana]

Result: 1256 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-OSUBerkeleyStateCollegeFinal.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 367

Question: This figure's domicile experiences the four seasons simultaneously, one at each corner. In one story, this deity gives a wish-granting child named "Snotty-Nosed Brat" to a lumberjack in exchange for his firewood, but the lumberjack sends the child away after he runs out of wishes. In another story, this figure ordered one of his servants to capture a monkey in order to consume its liver, but after his servant failed he crushed all of its bones. This figure's daughter, whose name meant "luminous jewel", turned into a dragon after giving birth and flew away from her husband. In another story, this figure helped his son-in-law recover a fish-hook. One day within this figure's palace is equivalent to one hundred years in the real world; that fact plays heavily into the legend of a fisherman who visited it, named Urashima Taro. This figure possessed a set of jewels that controlled the tides, and through his daughter Otohime and son-in-law Hoori, he is the great-grandfather of Jimmu Tenno. For 10 points, name this dragon, the Shinto god of the sea

ANSWER: Ryujin or Watatsumi

Result: 1257 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-PennChicagoBCarletonFinal.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 383

Question: The Greeks identified this deity by the name Epaphus and this god was often depicted with a uraeus snake. During Roman times, a lictor was assigned to guard this deity and Julian the Apostate reinstated this god's cult. The festival of deity was being celebrated when Cambyses returned from an abortive and cannibalistic campaign against the Ethiopians, resulting in Cambyses stabbing this deity in the thigh. This deity's mother was left unable to bear any other children after this god was born, and he was conceived when a lightning strike impregnated her. Psammiticus was responsible for constructing a temple to this deity, whose worship was instituted by Kakau. Having double hair of his tail and a likeness of an eagle on his side, this god held a scarab under his tongue and was covered in black skin with a diamond mark on his forehead. This deity was viewed as the ka of Ptah and was worshipped at Memphis. Picked from a herd of bulls, for ten points name this Egyptian bull deity, who was combined with Osiris to form the god, Serapis.

ANSWER: Apis

Result: 1258 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-UCSDFinal.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 446

Question: Girls from Troezen who were just about to be married offered locks of their hair to this figure to commemorate their virginity. This figure shares his name with a giant killed by Hermes, and by his father this man was the half-brother of Demophoon. This man was cursed by Aphrodite after building a rival deity's temple near her lands, which curse resulted in his death. This man married the nymph Egeria, and changed his name to Virbius after being brought back to life by Asclepius. Either a wild bull or a sea monster terrified this figure's horses, which dragged this figure to his death in an olive grove. This man was a favorite of Artemis, who may have avenged his death by having Adonis killed and his mother is given in some legends as Antiope. His death came about when his father prayed to Poseidon after this man's stepmother Phedre alleges that he had tried to rape her. For 10 points, identify this mythological son of Theseus and a similarly-named Amazonian queen whose girdle was the target of Heracles' ninth labor.

ANSWER: Hippolytus [obviously, do not accept "Hippolyta," the mother of this figure]

Result: 1259 | ACF Nationals | 2011 | Round: 2011-ACFNationals-VCUAandBFinal.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 460

Question: In Hittite mythology, Teshub uses one of these implements to separate the diorite monster Ullikummi from the giant Upelluri; that device of this type had earlier been used to separate the earth from the heavens. In Japanese myth, a trio of weasels named for this implement knock down, slice, and heal wayfarers. This namesake of the Kamaitachi is often depicted as wielded by the Basque goddess Mari and Ereshkegal's consort Nergal. Midas' son Lityerses killed people with these implements after challenging them to a contest involving them. In addition to winged sandals, Hermes gives Perseus one of these. Typhon steals one of these from Zeus and cuts his tendons off with it. A third instance of an adamant one of these in Greek mythology indirectly causes the birth of Aphrodite. For 10 points, name this tool used by Kronos to castrate Uranus, an implement sometimes wielded by Demeter for its use in harvesting wheat.

ANSWER: sickle

Result: 1260 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - Berkeley and Miami C final.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 512

Question: One attendant of this deity wears a golden snood and, in the Merseburg Incantation, helped heal the horse of Phol. Another attendant of this deity rode a horse whose name, meaning "hoof-thrower", is Hofvarpnir. Sometimes identified with the physician Eir, this deity was attended by Gna and Fulla, and is the only one other than its owner to be able to sit on Hlidskjalf. Scholars have proposed various theories about this deity's association with springs and swamps based on the name of her hall, Fensalir. In the Lokasenna, Loki calls this deity out for sleeping with Vili and Ve, the brothers of her husband. The giantess Thokk was the only one to deny her pleas to weep for her son, who'd fallen victim to a mistletoe dagger. For 10 points, identify this Norse deity, the mother of Hoder and Baldur and the wife of Odin.

ANSWER: Frigg [or Frigga; or Fricka]

Result: 1261 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - Brown and Michigan A final.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 519

Question: This figure was once transformed into an ass and forced to pull another character's plow after becoming magically stuck to a golden basin while searching for her son. She was able to escape an engagement by helping her future husband devise a game called "Badger-in-the-Bag." Her son was given a name referencing his golden-hair by Teyrnon, who discovered that son in the stables after he disappeared shortly after his birth. After that disappearance, this figure's handmaidens smeared puppy blood on her mouth and claimed that she had eaten the baby. Often considered cognate to Epona, she married Manawydan after her first husband died in a war with Matholwch. For 10 points, identify this woman who appears in two branches of the Mabinogion, the mother of Pryderi and wife of Pwyll.

ANSWER: Rhiannon

Result: 1262 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - Cornell and Kansas State A final.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 560

Question: The bearers of this figure's sacred bundle included Shield Hand and Water Headdress, according to the Codex Boturini, and his messenger was partial to quail sacrifices and was named Paynal. Also known as the "Lucid Macaw", this resident of the blue seventh heaven was associated with the mid-day sun and wielded a weapon known as the Turquoise Serpent, or the xiuh coatl. He was responsible for the creation of the moon from the severed head of his sister Coyolxauhqui, who he killed after fighting off the Four Hundred Southerners. The Templo Mayor was divided between Tlaloc and this god, whose name means "left-handed hummingbird" and who was born as a result of a ball of feathers impregnating Coatlicue. For 10 points, name this Aztec god of war.

ANSWER: Huitzilopochtli [(h)weet-zee-lo-"POKE"-tli]

Result: 1263 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - Editors 1 final.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 574

Question: When Aeneas's crew visited a location formerly inhabited by one of these creatures, they picked up the marooned sailor Achaemenides. Euripides's play Alcestis describes how Apollo was forced to serve Admetus for a year after killing these figures in retaliation for Zeus's killing of Asclepius. They supposedly built the mortarless fortifications of Mycenae and Tiryns, and their other creations include the invisibility-granting helmet of Hades. After Campe was slain, they were released from Tartarus along with their brothers the Hecatoncheires. The most famous individual one, a son of Thoosa, of them crushed Acis with a rock out of love for Galatea and was fooled by a warrior claiming that he was named "No man". For 10 points, Brontes, Steropes, Arges, and Polyphemus are all examples of which race of mythical one-eyed giants?

ANSWER: cyclops [or Cyclopes]

Result: 1264 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - Editors 2 final.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 601

Question: In one story, this figure's vision was restored with gazelle milk after he was forced to hide out in a pair of oases, while in another story, he led his followers in harpooning 651 crocodiles and hippopotami outside the town of Edfu. He was occasionally depicted sitting atop a lotus flower holding his thumb to his mouth. His hands were once recovered in a trap created by Sobek, who also saved this deity's four sons, who protected canopic jars. His incarnation as the rising sun was transformed into the Greek god of silence Harpocrates, while his teardrop-marked "eye" was represented by the goddess Wadjet. This god's exploits include disguising a stone boat and ejaculating into some lettuce to defeat his avuncular nemesis. For 10 points, identify this falcon-headed rival of Set, the son of Isis and Osiris.

ANSWER: Horus [the teardrop marking means that Horus is actually Lil' Wayne]

Result: 1265 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - Editors 3 final.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 631

Question: This deity was originally the daughter of the sage Bhrigu. She was the only divine being to emerge from the churning of the ocean and is traditionally worshipped on the first full moon after Durga Puja. One story relates how she offers a thousand flowers every day at an altar to Shiva, but when she comes up short one day she attempts to cut her breasts off to make up the difference. Her mount is an owl, though she is often depicted seated on or carrying a lotus flower. Her avatars include Rukmini, Radha, and Sita, all of whom are the spouses of the incarnations of her husband. For 10 points, identify this Hindu goddess, a bringer of good luck and wealth who serves as the consort of Vishnu.

ANSWER: Lakshmi [or Shri; or Mahalakshmi; or Thirumagal]

Result: 1266 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - Georgetown and ASU A final.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 640

Question: The Suda claims that one of this goddess's offspring helps guide people to the Nesoi Makaron and shares a name with a woman who volunteered to be sacrificed to this goddess by Demophon in the Heracleidae. Anapos was the husband of one companion of this figure, the nymph Cyane, who melted after witnessing a certain event. This figure once stopped her husband from seducing a nymph by turning that nymph into a mint plant. She may have slept with Zeus to produce her daughter Melinoe, while her other children include Macaria. A Lapith who attempted to abduct her was permanently fastened to a chair, while she gained her most famous position after accidentally eating a few pomegranate seeds. For 10 points, name this consort of Hades, the daughter of Demeter.

ANSWER: Persephone [accept Proserpina until "Zeus"]

Result: 1267 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - Maryland A and Boise State final.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 663

Question: Along with a bound Loki and the Midgard Serpent, this figure is depicted on the west side of the Gosforth Cross. This figure claimed Jarl as his son after sleeping with both Jarl's mother and her husband, and then taught him runes and gave him one of this figure's names. This grandson of Geirrendour or Aegir once took the guise of a seal to rescue the Brisingamen from Loki at the Singasteinn. Sometimes called the White God, he resides in Himinbjorg, and he rides the horse Gulltop and wields the sword Hofund. He can hear the wool grow on a sheep's back and will blow the Gjallarhorn to announce Ragnarok, where he will kill Loki but die from his wounds. For 10 points, name this Norse god who guards the rainbow bridge Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdallr [prompt on Gullintani or Rig; prompt on White God before it's mentioned]

Result: 1268 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - Northwestern final.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 676

Question: One section of the Sritattvanidhi details the thirty-two different iconographic representations of this deity, while the Mudgala Purana describes his eight incarnations. The primary festival dedicated to this deity sees devotees immerse clay representations of him in the nearest body of water. One story claims that he ate most of a city on Mount Kailash, while another story claims that he once suffered from Shani's evil eye. He once ran in a circle around his parents in order to win a race against his brother Skanda. His mount is a rat or a mouse, and he is often worshipped as the remover of obstacles. The most famous story about this god details how his attempt to stop his father from seeing his mother in the bath, resulting in his decapitation. For 10 points, identify this son of Parvati and Shiva, known for his one-tusked elephant head.

ANSWER: Ganesha [accept any of the following: Ganesh; Ganesa; Ganapati; Vinayaka; or Pillaiyar]

Result: 1269 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - RPI A and Minnesota final.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 702

Question: According to some sources, the Graces were the children of the naiad Aegle and this god. A septet of sons of this god drove the Telkhines off of Rhodes. One son of this Greek god was the ruler of Colchis when Phrixus presented the Golden Fleece. His affair with Perse resulted in that son, Aeetes, as well as a daughter of who fell in love with a white bull sent by Poseidon. This father of Pasiphae and Circe used the island of Thrinacia to pasture his cattle, which were guarded by his daughters Lampetie and Phaethusa. This god was angered when those cattle were slaughtered and eaten by Eurylochus and the crewmen of Odysseus. Another son of this only son of the Titan Hyperion drowned after losing control of his chariot. For 10 points, name this father of Phaeton, the original Greek god of the sun.

ANSWER: Helios [or Helius]

Result: 1270 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - South Carolina A and Ohio State A final.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 718

Question: He was the grandfather of the musician-hero Zarex through his son Carystus, while his daughter Endeis married Aeacus and became the mother of Peleus and Telamon. This child of Cronus and Philyra married a nymph who shared her name with Tiresias's mother. He gave an ashen spear to Peleus which was later used to heal Telephus. While accompanying a hero to a feast held by Pholus, he was hit in the thigh with a poisoned arrow, but was unable to die. To end this figure's suffering, Heracles negotiated with Zeus such that this character exchanged his immortality for the freedom of Prometheus. Unlike all the beings similar to him, he was not the son of Nephele and Ixion. For 10 points, identify this tutor of Achilles and Heracles, an unusually civilized centaur.

ANSWER: Chiron [accept Cherion or Kheiron]

Result: 1271 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - State College and Yale C final.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 740

Question: This figure killed two natives of Arisbe, Axylus and his charioteer Calesius. He traded a set of bronze armor for the golden armor of Glaucus after listening to the latter relate the story of Bellerophon. This character slew Eniopeus before a thunderbolt from Zeus convinced Nestor to turn this man's chariot around. He chases down, interrogates, and kills Dolon, after which he and a fellow warrior kill Rhesus and steal his horses. He later accompanied that fellow warrior on a mission to steal the Palladium. His charioteer Sthelenus once stole Aeneas's horses while this warrior was busy fighting and wounding Aphrodite and Ares. For 10 points, identify this son of Tydeus, a king of Argos who like his friend Odysseus was aided by Athena during the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Diomedes [or Diomed]

Result: 1272 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - VCU final.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 801

Question: Menw, son of Three-Cries, provided some preliminary scouting for one of these events, which was undertaken at the behest of the giant Ysbaddaden and carried the additional goals of recovering a comb, scissors, and a razor. Finn McCool lets healing water run through his hands instead of saving Diarmid O'Dyna during another one of these events. In the Odyssey, Eurycleia recognizes Odysseus because of a wound he sustained during one, while Heracles learned that he'd have to use a heavy snow bank to conclude one of them on Mount Erymanthos. Another one of these events began after King Oeneus forgot to sacrifice to Artemis and ended through the work of Atalanta, Meleager, and others in Calydon. For 10 points, name this common mythological action, including the seeking of Twrch Trwyth, which usually ends with the death of a male pig.

ANSWER: boar hunts [accept word forms that specify the seeking and/or killing of a boar]

Result: 1273 | ACF Regionals | 2011 | Round: ACF Regionals 2011 - Yale A and Ohio State B final.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 819

Question: In the Argonautica, Hera promises that this man and Medea will unite in the Elysian Fields, while some stories claim that after his death, his mother brought his remains to the island of Leuke. He was once wounded in a fight near the river Scamander against Asteropaeus. In one story, his whereabouts were revealed by Thestor, who sensed that he was on Scyros, disguised as a girl named Pyrrha in the court of Lycomedes. He fell in love with the Trojan princess Polyxena, while Helenus revealed the importance of this character's son with Deidamia, Neoptolemus. The death of his friend Patroclus inspires him to return to the Trojan War, where he eventually kills Hector in single combat. For 10 points, name this Greek hero, invincible except for his heel.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 1274 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 50113

Question: This being accepted death only when he found that the life-giving plant he sought had been stolen by a snake. After his death, he was considered a minor deity associated with Tammuz, since he himself also descended to the underworld. This man's former rival and later companion was created from clay by Aruru. This man's search for Utnapishtim is largely inspired by that companion's death. That companion helped this man slay the bull of heaven, and lived in the wilderness with beasts before being tamed by a temple prostitute. Identify, for 10 points, this friend of Enkidu, a Sumerian king of Uruk who fails to attain immortality in his namesake Mesopotamian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh [or Bilgames]

Result: 1275 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 10 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 50314

Question: A book of spells named for this deity was supposedly buried in the tomb of Prince Neferkaptah. The creator of the Ogdoad cosmology, his consort, depicted in a leopard skin, was named Seshat, and the Greeks fused him with Hermes, making his cult center Hermopolis. Originally a lunar deity, he gave Isis the magic word needed to revive Osiris and he arbitrated between Horus and Set. This god also protected Ra from the serpent Apep and weighed the hearts of the dead against the feather of Ma'at. Responsible for astronomy and math, he was occasionally portrayed as a baboon. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of wisdom, usually depicted with the head of an ibis.

ANSWER: Thoth of Djehuty [accept either]

Result: 1276 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 11 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 50325

Question: The Celtic god of this was Mannanan Mac Lir; one deity of it had his bride choose him out of all the gods from only his feet, thus marrying Skadi. Another from the same pantheon married Ran, fathered nine billow-maidens, and hosts elaborate parties for the Aesir. Besides Njord and Aegir, the most famous deity of this type turned several Phaecians in Alcinous's sight to stone, helped Apollo build the the walls of Troy, lost a contest judged by Cecrops to patronize a city when his rival produced an olive tree, and made horses. For 10 points, name this role played by the earthquake-causing, trident-wielding Poseidon.

ANSWER: God of the Sea (accept clear knowledge equivalents, but do not accept things like River Gods)

Result: 1277 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 12 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 50343

Question: This figure accidentally hurled a disc at his grandfather Acrisius, killing him; Dictys saved him and his mom after they were cast out into the ocean in a wooden chest. He served Seriphos's king Polydectes, and received an expanding knapsack for one quest. This hero fought a sea monster threatening the daughter of Cepheus and Casseiopeia, who he later married. The son of Zeus in the form of golden rain with Danaë, he stole the Grey Sisters' eyeball to find an enemy whose head later topped the Aegis after this man used his mirrored shield. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who slew the snake-headed petrifier Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 1278 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 12 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 50355

Question: This figure granted Bhasmasura a boon, allowing him to slay anyone on whose head he placed his hand. He once burned the god of love, Kama, to death. During the Kurma incarnation of another deity, this god ingested the deadly Halahala to protect the rest of the world; he thus gained the epithet "Neelakantam," or "blue-throated one." This deity resides on Mount Kailash, rides the white bull Nandi, and is often worshipped in the form of a lingam. He is the husband of Parvati. For 10 points, identify this member of the Trimurti with a third eye, the "destroyer" god of Hinduism.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 1279 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 2 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 50152

Question: Clymenus, Polydegmon, and Eubulus were epithets or euphemisms spoken rather than the name of this deity, who owned Cape Taenarum. He turned a daughter of Oceanus, his nymph lover Leuce, into a white poplar tree, and laid claim to the minerals within the earth. Pirithous got stuck in a chair belonging to this deity, who abducted his eventual wife by tricking her into eating pomegranate seeds. His Helm of Darkness grants its wearer invisibility. For 10 points, name this god who for six months of the year is the husband of Persephone, a brother of Zeus and Poseidon who rules the Greek underworld.

ANSWER: Hades [accept Pluto until "Greek" is read]

Result: 1280 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 3 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 50171

Question: When lodged near Franang's Falls, this deity wove the first fishing net, and during a dispute over not being offered a glass of ale, he killed Fimafeng. He fled from one feast in the shape of a salmon. Currently chained below a venom-dripping snake, this god will ride a ship made of fingernails, the Naglfar, and kill Heimdall. His deeds include cutting Sif's gold hair and directing Hodr's aim with mistletoe to kill Baldur. For 10 points, name this being who's technically a giant among the Aesir, a Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 1281 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 4 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 50186

Question: Sarutahiko, the husband of Uzume, guards of one of these objects in Shinto; a group of bears and monkeys led by Sugreeva aids Rama in building one of these. One of these structures guarded by Obedience, Covenant, and Justice in Zoroastrianism is Chinvat. Horatius Cocles defended the Sublician one and another is guarded by the owner of the Gjallarhorn. For 10 points, name these constructs, one famous example of which is the rainbow Bifrost, which spanned the distance between Midgard and Asgard.

ANSWER: bridges

Result: 1282 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 5 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 50212

Question: When this deity intervenes in human affairs, he is sometimes known as Ygg, and he stumps the giant Vafthrudnir with a riddle. His possessions include a bracelet which replicates itself. He is often accompanied by Geri and Freki, or by Hugin and Munin, ravens who report to him, although when he sits on his chair, he can see everything, thanks to a deal he struck with Mimir. In order to obtain the wisdom of the runes, he hung himself on Yggdrasil, and he has only one eye. For 10 points, name this chief Norse god, who lends his name to the third day of the week.

ANSWER: Odin (accept Wotan, or like, a billion other Norse kennings and associated anglicizations)

Result: 1283 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 6 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 50229

Question: The oral folklore hero Arash uses this object to determine the boundary between Iranian and foreign lands. In Hinduism, one of these partly made up of BEES is wielded by Kama-deva. In Chinese tradition, the Earth stops overheating after Houyi uses this weapon to kill nine of the ten suns. Kodanda is Rama's weapon of this type, while Gandiva is Arjuna's. In Greek myth, the poisoned Philoctetes inherited this weapon from Heracles, and Paris uses one to hit Achilles's heel, killing him. For 10 points, name the weapon that is strung by Odysseus upon his return to Ithaca, and which is wielded by Apollo and Cupid.

ANSWER: bow and arrows [prompt on just "arrows"]

Result: 1284 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 7 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 50255

Question: The goddess Macha in the Ulster cycle is associated with this species of animal. The Rig Veda explains how to ritually sacrifice this animal and a common epithet in the Iliad primarily describes Hector as their "breaker". The tenth avatar of Vishnu, Kalki, will possess a white version of this animal, and in Shinto, Susanoo throws a flayed carcass of this animal at his sister's loom. Heracles tamed four flesh-eating ones of Diomedes; Loki was impregnated to bear Sleipnir, Odin's eight-legged one; and the Lapiths fought a race of beings with the bodies of these animals, led by Chiron. For 10 points, name this animal, whose rare winged examples include Pegasus.

ANSWER: horses [prompt "mares"]

Result: 1285 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 8 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 50272

Question: Belenus was the Gaulish deity of this type, and in The Tale of Prince Igor's Host, a son of Svarog named Dazhbog has this role. In Vedic religion, the Adityas are seven deities of this type. The Incan one is a son of Viracocha named Inti while an Indian one is Surya; one Greek one flayed the satyr Marysas, and the Japanese one hid in a cave after abuse from her brother Susanoo. Another one's son Phaethon epically failed at this role, whose Egyptian holder fights Apep regularly after using a barge. For 10 points, what class of deity includes Amaterasu, Ra, and Helios?

ANSWER: sun gods [accept solar deities]

Result: 1286 | BHSAT | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 50282

Question: The Tale of Two Brothers revolves around this figure and his younger brother, Bet. One story suggests that this god branded Set with a hot iron when Set took on the form of a leopard to attack this deity's father, thus giving the leopard its spots. In some versions, when that father, Osiris, was slain and dismembered, this male deity reassembled and embalmed the body, making him the patron deity of mummification. He encourages Ammit, a crocodile-like beast, to devour hearts found to weigh less than the feather of Ma'at in the Book of the Dead. For 10 points, what Egyptian god of the dead is often depicted with a jackal's head?

ANSWER: Anubis [or Inpu; or Anup]

Result: 1287 | Chicago Open | 2011 | Round: FINALS2.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 877

Question: A story about this creature says that it was once captured by a king, but it refused to sing for three years because it was without a mate - the king tried to solve its loneliness by setting a mirror next to it, but that only caused this creature to die. Another story says it was once sought out by many similar creatures, who journeyed through several valleys until only thirty of them remained, at which point they realized that this creature was just a reflection of themself in the water. In another tale, this creature instructs her student to break a branch off a tamarisk tree and create an arrow, which is to be aimed at the forehead of Isfandiyar. This creature becomes the nurse of Zal after he's abandoned on Mount Elburz by his father Sam, and she grants Zal three feathers to call on her in his time of need. Sometimes said to reside within the sacred plant Haoma, or the Tree of Life, FTP, name this great bird who appears in Persian mythology.

ANSWER: Simurgh (or Angha before mentioned, or kalavinka before "water")

Result: 1288 | Chicago Open | 2011 | Round: PACKET01MikeTeam.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 888

Question: One figure by this name was the wife of Corythus on the island of Samothrace - she reportedly took refuge under the Palladium after being raped by Zeus, but Athena grew angry and flung the Palladium to earth, where this figure gave it to her son Dardanus. Another figure of this name has her speech often compared to a nightingale's song, and she mocks the corpse of a man murdered mid-sacrifice, stating "May I never have a husband with a girl's face, but one with a man's ways." She identifies a scar on the brow of another character as caused by chasing a fawn in his youth. She attempts to convince her sister Chrysothemis to work with her, but gets warned that Aegisthus is planning to imprison her. FTP, name this subject of eponymous plays by Sophocles and Euripides, the sister of Orestes.

ANSWER: Electra

Result: 1289 | Chicago Open | 2011 | Round: PACKET02Teitler.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 912

Question: This god was said to control the opening of twin caverns below his cult center that could release life-giving floods. He assisted the births of three future kings while pretending to be a servant to four goddesses disguised as dancing girls; one of those goddesses was his consort, the frog goddess Heket. Originally a god of the source of the Nile, he appears in the New Kingdom tale of the Two Brothers, where he fashions a beautiful woman to be the wife of Bata. He forms a triad with his consort Satet and their daughter Anuket; the three are depicted with Djoser at the top of the Famine Stele, which describes how Djoser ended a seven-year famine by rebuilding this god's temple at his cult center in Elephantine. FTP, name this ram-headed Egyptian god credited with forming bodies on his potter's wheel.

ANSWER: Khnum

Result: 1290 | Chicago Open | 2011 | Round: PACKET02Teitler.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 920

Question: In one of these works, a man is given the nickname "Brushwood-belly" after dreaming that a woman eviscerates him and replaces his guts with brushwood. That example of these works sees the ordeal of Going under the Sod used to settle a question of inheritance, and several characters build settlements at places where highseat-pillars wash ashore. That example of this genre also praises the secret ship-building skills of Unn the Wealthy. In another of these works, the title character realizes his sword won't pierce the armor of Atli the Strong, so he tackles Atli and bites out his throat. A third example of these works sees the title character choose to die in his burning home after peace negotiations break down at the Althing. FTP, the Laxdaela, and tales named for Egil Skallagrimsson and Burnt Njal, are examples of what early prose narratives of Iceland?

ANSWER: Icelandic sagas

Result: 1291 | Chicago Open | 2011 | Round: PACKET04Editors.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 959

Question: In the wonderful world of Lithuanian mythology, this role is fulfilled by the goddess Gildine, who wears a white gown and at one point gets trapped in a nutshell. The Incan god who occupied this role was known as Supay, who had the body of a lion and horns of a ram. One Mayan god who filled this role was called "God A" and was pictured wearing bells in his hair and holding a Moan bird - he's sometimes called "Yum Cimil," but his usual name is Ah Puch. The figure who fulfilled this role in Aztec myth once sent a flock of quail in order to prevent Quetzalcoatl from stealing, but with the aid of the goddess Cihuacoatl, Quetzalcoatl escaped this figure with some cracked bones that he mixed in a jade bowl. FTP, name this role fulfilled by Mictlan-tecuhtli, as well as Ereshkigal and Hades.

ANSWER: gods of death (or the underworld, or any equivalents)

Result: 1292 | Chicago Open | 2011 | Round: PACKET05Beyer.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 973

Question: One being with this name was a river god whose daughters included Metope, the wife of Asopus. Another daughter of his was an Arcadian nymph named either Nicostrate or Themis, who married Echenus, but bore Evander to Hermes. According to Hesiod, another one had parents and siblings who represented the dangers of the sea. This figure was assigned to his post either by a Titan who feared despoliation of his daughters by a son of Zeus, or by a goddess who was irritated at those daughters. This figure was said to be able speak in many different voices and it became immortalized as the constellation Draco. Attested as either the offspring of Ceto and Phorcys, or of Typhon and Echidna, FTP, name this hundred-headed serpent killed during the eleventh labor of Hercules, a monster who was set to guard the golden apples of the Hesperides.

ANSWER: Ladon

Result: 1293 | Chicago Open | 2011 | Round: PACKET08Lafer.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 1037

Question: In one myth, this figure kills Oides and makes a deal with Sicilian merchants to sell them three girls intended as victims in a wild beast show. He attempts to stop a plague by appeasing a god, but ignores another who sends a monster to ravage his land, leading the latter god to send a plague as well. An assembly convened by Phoenodamas results in backfire of this man's plan to offer girls other than his own daughter as a sacrifice. An army is raised against this man in Tiryns by a figure who'd been given mortal horses, and not the immoral horses this figure had received as compensation for rape of his brother Ganymede. This father of Hesione is vigilant about keeping the ships of the Greeks away from his kingdom, but gets killed by Hercules along with all of his sons except one. FTP, name this man succeeded by his surviving son Priam as the king of Troy.

ANSWER: Laomedon

Result: 1294 | Chicago Open | 2011 | Round: PACKET10Ray.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 1081

Question: According to one mythos, this figure battled the trickster Pomola, who was the spirit of the night wind. He rises from the dead after being killed by a dart made out of an owl feather, after which he goes to a river and kills his enemy by pulling up a fern plant and flinging the roots at him. Another story says he rode on the back of a whale for days, jumped onto a beach, and kidnapped Summer in the forest - then took her back to melt the tent of Winter. He meets his match when challenged to fight Wasis, who is only a small baby sitting on the floor sucking maple sugar who says "Goo Goo" and defeats him. According to some, he's the son of the Earth Mother who created plants and humans out of her body, while his evil brother Malsum created poisonous snakes. In another story, he saves the world from the evil Bull-Frog who swallows all of the water. He created the Penobscot River by killing that frog. FTP, name this recurring hero of the Abenaki, Mik'maq, and other Algonquin tribes.

ANSWER: Glooskap (or Gluscabe)

Result: 1295 | Chicago Open | 2011 | Round: PACKET11Weiner.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 1099

Question: Heracles took refuge with this king when he defeated Laogoras, and drove the Dryopians out of this man's realm. Peleus befriended this man and stayed at his court until Psamathe sent a sea-wolf to attack his cattle. This figure's warlike brother, Daedalion, was transformed into a hawk in his grief over Chione. In the Metamorphoses, Juno sends Iris to the land of Sleep to convince Morpheus to take this man's shape. In one story, this son of Lucifer, or Eosphoros the morning star, enraged the gods by calling his wife "Hera" while she called him "Zeus." This man drowns when his ship is destroyed on a voyage to the Oracle at Delphi. After death, this king of Trachis is transformed by the gods into a Halcyon bird with his wife. FTP, name this mythical king paired with his wife Alcyone.

ANSWER: Ceyx

Result: 1296 | Chicago Open | 2011 | Round: PACKET15Carson.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 1165

Question: In one story, this god struck the uzu-e, the "bringer forth of flesh", with a mattock, which he had recently invented. Another story tells of how this god angrily redistributed seven auras to the lions, the reed-beds, the palace, and various other places, after being presented with a head in a bag. This god created the sibling grain deities Lahar and Ashnan and fathered the god of diseases and pestilence, Namtar, on Ereshkigal. This deity, who was worshipped at the temple of Ekur, was exiled from Nippur after his vizier Nuska helped him facilitate an affair that led to the birth of the moon god Sin. He later fathered Ninazu and Nergal after the object of that affair, Ninlil, followed this god to the underworld. His attempt to kill off humanity with a flood was foiled when Utnapishtim was made immortal by Enki. FTP, identify this son of Anu and Ki, a Sumerian wind god.

ANSWER: Enlil [or Ellil]

Result: 1297 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 31798

Question: Cadmus once killed this deity's dragon and had to serve this deity for eight years, after which he married Harmonia, this deity's daughter. This deity was wounded by Diomedes (die-AHM- ee-dees) during the Trojan War when he appeared on the battlefield helping the Trojans. This deity's union with Aphrodite yielded Eros (AIR-ohs) and his attendants Phobos (FOE-bows) and Deimos (DAY-mows). For 10 points, which son of Zeus and Hera is the Greek god of war?

ANSWER: Ares [prompt on Mars until "Greek"]

Result: 1298 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 31818

Question: This man's associates included Red Hawley, Bud Kangley, and Shot Gunderson. His wife is variously given as either Carrie McIntie or Lucette Kensack. One of this man's pets, Benny, died after swallowing a stove that had been used to make oversized pancakes. On a detour from Fargo to Seattle, this man created the Grand Canyon. For 10 points, Babe the Big Blue Ox accompanied what giant lumberjack of American folklore?

ANSWER: Paul Bunyan

Result: 1299 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 10 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 32718

Question: This father of Kebechet had a cult centered at Cynopolis. This Egyptian god was associated with the Greek deity Hermes because of their similar roles. His mother is given as either Bast or Nephthys, and he predates one of his potential fathers, Osiris, as god of the underworld. This god weighs the heart of the dead against Ma'at's (MAHT's) feather. For 10 points, identify this jackal-headed Egyptian god of mummification.

ANSWER: Anubis [or Inpu; or Anpu; or Anup; or Ienpw]

Result: 1300 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 2 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 31831

Question: This deity caused Hodr (HOE-dur) to kill another god with mistletoe, and then failed to weep for that god in the guise of Thokk. He prevented a wall from being built around Asgard on time by taking the form of a mare and laying with Svadilfari (SVAHD-ill-FAR-ee); that union created Sleipnir (SLEEPnear). He is better known for fathering the Midgard Serpent and Hel. For 10 points, identify this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 1301 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 3 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 31849

Question: This deity led Perseus to the Gray Witches so he could kill Medusa. In The Odyssey, this god gave Odysseus the herb, moly, to protect him from Circe's (SIR-see's) magic, and was later asked by Zeus to order Calypso to let Odysseus go free. As an infant, this deity stole Apollo's cattle and gave Apollo the lyre he had invented. For 10 points, identify this Greek messenger god often depicted with his winged sandals.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 1302 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 5 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 32558

Question: In one quest, this figure is directed to the ferryman Urshanabi (UR-shah-NAH-bee) by Siduri. After his companion dies, this figure visits Utnapishtim (OOT-nah-PEESH-tim), who tells him where to find a plant capable of restoring youth. That plant is later stolen by a serpent. This figure slew the guardian of the cedar forest, Humbaba, and the Bull of Heaven, with Enkidu. For 10 points, name this king of Uruk and hero of a Mesopotamian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 1303 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 5 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 32564

Question: This man is told by the ghost of his wife Creusa to leave for Hesperia after carrying his father Anchises (ann-KYE-sees) and son Ascanius out of a besieged city. He visits the underworld with the help of a golden bough, on the advice of the Cumaean Sibyl. He duels Turnus for the hand of Lavinia. After this son of Venus leaves Carthage, Dido kills herself. For 10 points, name this Trojan who founds Rome according to an epic by Virgil.

ANSWER: Aeneas [prompt on The Aeneid]

Result: 1304 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 6 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 32579

Question: The god of war worshipped by these people was born from the union of a ball of feathers and Coatlicue (co-AHT-lee-KWAY). This people settled down in the place where they found an eagle, on a cactus, eating a snake. This people's main god threw himself on a funeral pyre after his chief rival, Tezcatlipoca (TEZ-cot-lee-POKE-AH), deceived him. For 10 points, identify this Mesoamerican civilization that worshipped the "Feathered Serpent," Quetzalcoatl (KWET-zahl- koh-AHT-ill).

ANSWER: Aztecs [prompt on Mexicans]

Result: 1305 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 7 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 32609

Question: When this figure was born, his mother Thetis (THEE-tiss) dipped him in the river Styx in an attempt to make him immortal. Agamemnon took Briseis (BRY-see-iss) from this figure, which caused him to refuse Agamemnon's commands to fight until his friend, Patroclus, died. As revenge for that death, this hero killed Hector. For 10 points, identify this Greek hero who was killed when a poisonous arrow pierced his heel.

ANSWER: Achilles [accept Achilleus]

Result: 1306 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 8 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 32670

Question: Most stories hold that this deity, not Athena, blinded the prophet Tiresias (TYE-ree-see-uhs). She cursed the nymph Echo to repeat only what others had said. This figure gave birth to Hephaestus (heh- FESS-tuss) and later threw him out of Olympus because of his ugliness. After her husband impregnated Leto (LEE-toh), she refused to let Leto give birth on land. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 1307 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 32702

Question: In one myth, these creatures rose from the blood spilled by Uranus when his son Cronus castrated him. They chased Oedipus (ED-uh-puhs) for wedding his mother and are believed to punish those who swear false oaths. Their members include Alecto (uh-LEK-toh), Megaera (muh-JEER-uh), and Tisiphone (ti-SIF-uh-nee). For 10 points, name these fearsome female winged deities of vengeance from Greco- Roman mythology.

ANSWER: Erinnyes [accept Eumenídes; accept Furies; accept Dirae (dahy-ree)]

Result: 1308 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 34718

Question: This figure was rescued from the Chair of Forgetfulness by Heracles. When this figure journeyed to his homeland, he eschewed a sea voyage and instead dispatched Sinis, who had torn apart travelers with bent-down trees, and other bandits. As king of Athens, this figure sheltered Oedipus in his old age and marched on Thebes to bury the dead. When returning from one particular adventure, he neglected to change the black sails on his ship, causing his father to leap into the sea. For 10 points, name this son of Aegeus who defeated the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 1309 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 10 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 34909

Question: In the form of a fly, this figure attempted to sabotage a forgery contest between two dwarf families by stinging Brokk. After Thiazi tortured this figure, he kidnapped Idun, whose golden apples brought youth to the gods. In the form of a mare, this figure stopped a giant from completing the building of Asgard's Wall. With Angrboda, he fathered Fenrir, Jormungand, and Hel. This giant tricked Hoder into killing his brother Balder with mistletoe. For 10 points, name this trickster of Norse Mythology.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 1310 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 2 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 34750

Question: In one story, this god gets drunk and seduces a celibate priestess, after which he burns himself to death and his heart becomes the morning star. His brother was the dog-headed skeletal psychopomp Xolotl. Another story sees this deity depart on a raft of snakes after being shamed by his rival Tezcatlipoca. Some Mormon scholars have claimed that this deity was actually Jesus Christ, and he was once notoriously assumed to have been incarnated as Hernan Cortez. For 10 points, name this feather-serpent deity from Aztec mythology.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 1311 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 3 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 34758

Question: Seven loaves mark one failure in this figure's quest, which was further thwarted when a snake ate a plant that he pulled from the bottom of the sea. The failure of this figure's quest rendered a flood survivor the only immortal being. This figure's companion was tamed by the harlot Shamhat. This figure traveled through Cedar Forest and defeated the demon Humbaba before meeting with Utnapishtim. The Bull of Heaven was later killed by this hero and his companion, Enkidu. For 10 points, name the king of Uruk whose tales are told in an ancient Sumerian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 1312 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 4 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 34786

Question: In Hindu myth, Hanuman mistakes this object for a piece of fruit and attempts to eat it. In Norse myth it is sometimes called Alfrodul and is devoured by wolf Skoll during Ragnarok. The archer Shen Yi shot nine of these objects in Chinese myth. One god of this object was born from the left eye of Izanagi. In Greek myth, it was personified by a god whose son Phaeton drove this object's chariot across the sky, accidentally scorching the earth. For 10 points, name this celestial body associated with Amaterasu, Helios, and Ra.

ANSWER: the sun

Result: 1313 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 5 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 34811

Question: One story in this myth system tells of a hero's journey to the Isle of Joy, which unexpectedly lasts for hundreds of years. A god of this mythology owned a cauldron that left everyone satisfied and a club that could both kill and revive. In this belief system, the love god Angus was conceived and born on the same day. This myth system includes the leader of the Tuatha De Danaan, the Daghda. For 10 points, name this mythology that has four cycles, including the Ulster and Fenian, whose characters include Finn Mac Cool and the Fianna.

ANSWER: Celtic mythology [or Irish mythology; accept word forms; do not accept "Welsh myth" or "Wales"]

Result: 1314 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 6 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 34823

Question: A book titled after one of these objects tells the story of a man who attracts his sons out of a burning house by means of an "able device," but is nevertheless not guilty of speaking falsehoods. That text states that any being can attain Buddha-hood, and is among the earliest Mahayana sutras. In Egyptian myth, Nefertum was born from one of them. It's not a golden egg, but some Hindu legends say that Brahma was also born from one of these plants. For 10 points, identify this flower that names a yoga position and whose "white" version names a Chinese revolt.

ANSWER: lotus

Result: 1315 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 6 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 34831

Question: This goddess was sometimes called Cynthia for her birthplace on Delos. In retribution for the death of a rabbit, she required the sacrifice of the maiden Iphigenia. She killed Niobe's children after Niobe bragged how she had seven times as many children as this goddess's own mother. After being born, she acted as midwife to her mother, Leto, during the birth of her twin. Actaeon was killed by his dogs after this figure turned him into a stag for watching her bathe. For 10 points, name this huntress, goddess of the moon, and twin sister to Apollo.

ANSWER: Artemis [or Diana]

Result: 1316 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 8 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 34872

Question: This figure, posing as Grimnir, was hung between two fires and given a drink by Agnar. In one story, he disguised himself as Bolverk and made a deal with Baugi. The ravens Huginn and Muninn rested upon his shoulders. This God's steed was fathered by Svaldifari, and had eight legs. This figure possessed the horse Sleipnir, the magic ring Draupnir, and the magic spear Gungnir. For 10 points, name this one-eyed god who retrieved the poetic mead for the gods and will be killed by Fenrir at Ragnarok, the Allfather of Norse Mythology.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wotan]

Result: 1317 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 34891

Question: When this figure kicked Mount Helicon, the well of the Muses, Hippocrene, was formed. After this figure was stung by a gadfly on the way to Mount Olympus, he threw his companion to the ground. This brother of Chrysaor was captured while drinking from a spring in Corinth. He was tamed with the use of Athena's golden bridle. He was born from the blood of Medusa and assisted his rider in battling the Amazons and killing the Chimaera. For 10 points, name this steed of Bellerophon, a winged horse of Greek Mythology.

ANSWER: Pegasus

Result: 1318 | Collegiate Novice | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 34895

Question: The Etruscan artist Vulca likely created a terracotta depiction of this figure found at Veii. Canova's Perseus was created to replace a depiction of this figure after Napoleon took it to France. That depiction of him is contained in a courtyard designed by Bramante in the Vatican Palace, and is a copy of a Leochares work. He is also the subject of a work in which he is about to catch and kill a lizard on a tree. Those are the depictions of him "of the Belvidere" and Praxiteles's depiction of him as "Sauroctonos." For 10 points, name this Greek god of light, music, and the arts.

ANSWER: Apollo [accept as part of any larger title mentioned in the question]

Result: 1319 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 54194

Question: This deity posed as Vegtam, son of Valtam, in one of his travels among the dead. This god is associated with the valknut, a symbol comprising three interlaced triangles. In the Havamal, this god made a sacrifice to himself to discover the runes, and he gave his eye at Mimir's well in exchange for wisdom. This god owns an eight-legged horse whose mother was Loki in the form of a mare. This god, whose wolves are Geri and Freki, welcomes those who die in battle at Valhalla. For 10 points, name this ruler of Asgard, the chief Norse god.

ANSWER: ODIN

Result: 1320 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 10 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 54441

Question: The son of this mythical figure defends and marries a duchess named Elsa but forbids her from asking his name; when she does so, he leaves in his swan boat never to return. This father of Lohengrin is in most tales the son of King Pellinore, through whom he is descended from Joseph of Arimathea. In his most famous adventure he heals Anfortas, who is actually the Fisher King. FTP who is this knight of the Round Table who, along with Sir Galahad and Sir Bors, accomplished the quest of the Holy Grail?

ANSWER: PERCIVAL

Result: 1321 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 12 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 54483

Question: This mythological figure was represented by the tyet, a design which represents this deity's namesake "knot" or "blood." This deity was able to make Ra reveal his secret name by fashioning a serpent from dust and Ra's spittle and then getting it to bite Ra. Knowledge of that secret name allowed this deity to stop the solar boat for help after Set, in the form of a snake, bit and poisoned the son she had hidden in a papyrus thicket. Also using her magic to refashion her husband's penis after it was eaten by a fish was, FTP, what Egyptian goddess, consort of Osiris?

ANSWER: ISIS

Result: 1322 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 12 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 54486

Question: This leader first came to prominence for his attacks on the Areopagus, particularly for his prosecution and later ostracism of his rival, Cimon. As strategos, however, he was unsuccessful in campaigns against Sicyon, home of his mother Agariste. One of his many building projects was the long walls connecting his city to the port of Piraeus. His patriotic speech extolling the dead and urging his city to continue its fight against its southern rival was recorded by Thucydides as this man's "funeral oration." FTP who was this Athenian statesman at the beginning of the Peloponnesian War who initiated the building of the Parthenon?

ANSWER: PERICLES

Result: 1323 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 13 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 54495

Question: . Among these entities are instructions that executions should either be by decapitation with swords, strangulation, immolation, or stoning followed by hanging, and that all those executed must be buried the same day. Others of these include a prohibition on creating oxen or emasculating any male creature or planting grain in vineyards. In addition to those above, compiled in a book published in Arabic under the title Kitab al-Farai'd, others include a prohibition against the drinking the wine of idolators,one against allowing proper girls to marry a mamzer, or child of an un holy union, and the perpetual grudge against the Amalekites. These are all, FTP, among what decrees collated by Maimonides and listed with their Biblical sources, the 613 rules theoretically binding all Jewish people?

ANSWER: MITZVOT

Result: 1324 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 13 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 54503

Question: One figure from this myth system followed a white boar into a fort where he decided to touch a golden cauldron; after doing so he was enchanted and couldn't talk or move, and later his mother was similarly caught. That figure, Pryderi, was one of seven survivors of a battle at which a giant companion was mortally wounded and asked his companions to cut off his head and return with it, where it was buried under the "white hill" facing France. Bran features prominently in this myth systems major collection, which also tells of Pwyll and Rhiannon. FTP what is this mythos recounted in the Mabinogion?

ANSWER: WELSH

Result: 1325 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 2 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 54210

Question: . In Aztec myth the underworld deity Techlotl was represented by this creature. In the Panchatantra this creature is deposed as king by the crow, which mocks him while he sleeps, leading to enmity between crows and this other bird. The demon hag Lilith is associated with this bird in Hebrew tradition. Glaucus is the name of one of these associated with the goddess for whom the Parthenon was built. FTP what are these nocturnal, predatory birds associated with Athena?

ANSWER: OWLS

Result: 1326 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 3 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 54229

Question: This deity's child with Medusa was the three-headed shepherd Cacus. This god was rescued by Thetis and Eurynome and taken to an underwater cave for nine years, until his mother saw Thetis wearing a jeweled brooch. He owns several three-legged tables with golden wheels and some gold mechanical women. This god used a thin mesh net to catch Ares cheating with his wife Aphrodite. He was found on the island of Lemnos with his legs broken after being thrown from the heavens. For 10 points, name this ugly son of Hera, the Greek smith god.

ANSWER: HEPHAESTUS

Result: 1327 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 3 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 54235

Question: . This culture instituted the mitimaes system, a forced resettlement of conquered people into loyal lands, under their first leader named Yupanqui. Their ninth leader took power instead of his brother Viracocha after he staved off an invasion by the Chanca people. The weak rule of their leader Huana Capac led to rivalry and then civil war between his two sons, with Huascar's forces losing to those of his half-brother, who was helped by a Spanish conquistador who later executed him by allegedly pouring molten gold down his throat. FTP this describes what South American empire last led by Atahualpa, with capital at Cuzco in what is now Peru?

ANSWER: INCA

Result: 1328 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 7 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 54348

Question: This figure made an otter-skin bag after killing the brother of Regin and Andvari in one story, which also sees him warn Hreidmar about a cursed ring. He distracted Svadilfari to prevent a frost giant from finishing the walls of Asgard on time in another story. That story sees this god give birth to Sleipnir while in the form of a mare. In another story Skadi set a serpent above this god after he was bound with the entrails of his son Nari for disguising himself as the giantess Pökk. This god gave a spear with mistletoe on the end of it to the blind god Hodr, leading to the death of Baldr. For 10 points, name this father of Hel, Fenrir, and Jormungandr, the Norse trickster god

ANSWER: LOKI

Result: 1329 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 8 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 54372

Question: One example of these creatures makes the sound which announces Ragnarok, after which he kills Tyr. In addition to that blood-soaked example of these creatures, Garm, these creatures include an animal which recognizes Odysseus returning home before dying, causing Odysseus to shed a tear. In addition to Argos, a more famous example of these creatures with a snake's tail is the child of Echidna and Typhon. That example of these creatures is bribed by Psyche with a cake, soothed by Orpheus's lyre, and captured by Heracles for his last labor. For 10 points, name this animal, the most famous example of which is the three headed Cerberus

ANSWER: dog

Result: 1330 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 54388

Question: This god was sometimes called Ipalnemohuani, meaning, "by whom we live." One story claims that he burned himself to death after his rival got him to drunkenly seduce a celibate priestess and subsequently became the morning star. Another story claims that he floated away on a raft of snakes. This god, said to have created mankind from the bones of previous races and blood from his penis, had a twin brother named Xolotl, and his rival was the one-footed "smoking mirror" god Tezcatlipoca. For 10 points, name this "feathered serpent" god from Aztec mythology

ANSWER: quetzalcoatl

Result: 1331 | Delta Burke | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 54411

Question: This god was sometimes called Ipalnemohuani, meaning, "by whom we live." One story claims that he burned himself to death after his rival got him to drunkenly seduce a celibate priestess and subsequently became the morning star. Another story claims that he floated away on a raft of snakes. This god, said to have created mankind from the bones of previous races and blood from his penis, had a twin brother named Xolotl, and his rival was the one-footed "smoking mirror" god Tezcatlipoca. For 10 points, name this "feathered serpent" god from Aztec mythology

ANSWER: quetzalcoatl

Result: 1332 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-01.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 1369

Question: In the Theogony, Hesiod describes this figure as "wily" and "ready-witted," and his story is also told in Hesiod's Works and Days. At Mekone (meh-CO-nay), he tries to trick Zeus by wrapping the bones of an ox inside its fat. He forecasts the travels of Io in a play by Aeschylus in which he is "bound," a punishment which results from his theft of a certain item, which he hides in a reed. For 10 points, name this Titan who stole fire and gave it to humans.

ANSWER: Prometheus

Result: 1333 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-01.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 1378

Question: This god gave the horse Gullfaxi to his son Magni after killing the giant Hrungnir with the help of his servant Thialfi. This god disguised himself as Freya to reclaim his weapon from Thrym, and will kill the Midgard Serpent at Ragnarok, only to die from its poison. He kills his enemies with lightning bolts from his hammer, Mjollnir. For 10 points, name this Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 1334 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-02.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 1421

Question: Often depicted as bearded man, either green or black in color and swathed like a mummy, this Egyptian deity is credited with the introduction of agriculture. In myth he is drowned and dismembered, only to be resurrected later by his wife. For 10 points, name this god, husband of Isis, an archetype of death and rebirth, who became the Egyptian lord of the dead.

ANSWER: Osiris

Result: 1335 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-03.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 1454

Question: One figure in this myth system is called Danu, while a goddess associated with horses is named Macha. Another figure in this myth system is Goll mac Morna, who killed the father of a prominent figure who burned his thumb while cooking the salmon of knowledge. That figure is from the Fenian cycle, while the villain of the Ulster cycle is named Medb and led the Cattle Raid of Cooley. For 10 points, name this myth system whose heroes include Fin MacCool and CuChulainn.

ANSWER: Irish myth

Result: 1336 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-03.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 1462

Question: This man's return home was expedited when his lover murdered her brother Apsyrtus. Two of this hero's men, Zetes and Calais, drove the harpies away from Phineas. Sent from Iolchos by his conniving uncle Pelias, this man arrived at Colchis, where Medea helped him obtain the golden fleece. This hero sailed in a ship with a prophetic prow along with Greece's greatest heroes. For 10 points, name this leader of the Argonauts.

ANSWER: Jason

Result: 1337 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-04.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 1506

Question: He was forced to wear women's clothing while working for the Lydian queen Omphale. He accidentally killed his music teacher Linus, and killed his wife Megara in a fit of madness. He killed the giant Antaeus by lifting him off the ground. He scared away the Stymphalian birds and killed the Nemean Lion with his club. This figure rerouted some rivers to clean the Augean Stables as part of a series of tasks completed for Eurystheus. For 10 points, name this demigod son of Zeus known for his twelve labors.

ANSWER: Hercules [or Heracles]

Result: 1338 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-05.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 1544

Question: In one story, this god disguises himself as the farmhand Bolverk in a successful attempt to retrieve the Mead of Poetry. This god sits atop the "high place" of Hlidskjalf, and that which he cannot see is recalled to him by his two ever-circling ravens, Hugin and Munin. This god, who hung from the world tree on the spear Gungnir to earn mastery of the runes, will be swallowed whole by the wolf Fenrir at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this one-eyed chief god of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wodinaz]

Result: 1339 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-06.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 1586

Question: At one point, this god had to kill someone who was protected from death at day and night, and both inside and outside of houses, and did so by killing that enemy on a threshold at twilight. He performed that feat in the form of Narasimha (NAH-rah-SIM-ha), a lion. This god also takes forms such as the fish Matsya (MOTS-yah) and the heroes Rama and Krishna, which are some of his ten avatars. For 10 points, identify this Hindu "preserver" god, who forms the Trimurti (treh-MORE-tee) with the creator Brahma and destroyer Shiva.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 1340 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-06.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 1602

Question: According to one source, this man becomes immortal after he is bathed in the river Numicus. This character kills the leader of the Rutulians named Turnus. He courts a daughter of king Latinus named Lavinia after using a golden bough to descend to the underworld. His embarkation from Carthage causes Dido to throw herself on a funeral pyre. This character escapes from the ruins of Troy with his father Anchises. For 10 points, name this protagonist of an epic by Vergil.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 1341 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-06.pdf | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 1604

Question: In Ovid's Metamorphoses, the hero Caenus is killed when some of these creatures pile rocks and trees on top of him. Another incident involving them occurred when one named Eurytion attempted to abduct Hippodameia at her wedding, leading to a battle between these creatures and the Lapiths. Other members of this race included Nessus, whose blood was used to kill Heracles, and the tutor of Jason and Achilles, Chiron. For 10 points, name this mythological race of creatures who were half man and half horse.

ANSWER: centaurs

Result: 1342 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-06.pdf | Question: 45 | Mythology | ID: 1624

Question: In one story, the cloud nymph Nephele is created in the form of this goddess in order to trick Ixion. She blinds Tiresias after he disagrees with her side of an argument. She curses Echo to a life of repeating the words of others, and forces Leto to give birth on the floating island of Delos. She employs the hundred-eyed giant Argus as a watchman and sends a gadfly to pursue Io around the world. She is often depicted jealously punishing her husband's love interests. For 20 points, name this wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera [or Juno]

Result: 1343 | HSAPQ Colonia 2 | 2011 | Round: colonia-06.pdf | Question: 46 | Mythology | ID: 1625

Question: According to one story, this man was carried up to the heavens during a storm, but not before commanding the people to worship him as Quirinus. According to legend, he saw twelve vultures when his brother only saw six, and he grew furious when his brother jumped over his wall. He killed Amulius and restored his grandfather Numitor to the throne of Alba Longa. He was the son of Rhea Silvia and Mars, and was fed by a she-wolf as a child. For 20 points, name this brother of Remus and founder of Rome.

ANSWER: Romulus

Result: 1344 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 02.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 2092

Question: Pelops bribed Myrtilus to sabotage one of these objects belonging to King Oenomaus. Artemis owned one that was carried by deer, and Helios gave one borne by dragons to Medea. After swearing by the River Styx, Helios also allowed his son (*) Phaeton to drive one of these vehicles. For 10 points, name this ancient vehicle, behind which Achilles drags Hector's body while being pulled by horses.

ANSWER: chariots

Result: 1345 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 02.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 2096

Question: This creature was able to break free from restraints named Leyding and Dromi, leading to the construction of Gleipnir, a harness that this creature thought it could escape from because it was thin and soft. However, when he found that he could not break it, he bit down on the hand of (*) Tyr. At Ragnarok, he will be freed from his tether with fiery gazes and breath and will kill Odin only to be killed by Odin's son, Vidar. For 10 points, name this offspring of Loki, a creature from Norse myth notable for being a giant wolf.

ANSWER: Fenrir [or the Fenris wolf]

Result: 1346 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 04.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 2127

Question: This figure is told to bury an oar in a land without access to the ocean, where a "seaborn death" will come to him. Aided by the swineherd Eumaeus (yoo-MAY-us), he kills Antinous after stringing his bow and shooting an arrow through twelve (*) axeheads. This figure tells his crew to tie him to the mast so he can listen to the Sirens. His adventures include sailing Scylla and escaping the cave of Polyphemus. For 10 points, name this husband of Penelope who takes ten years to return from Troy to Ithaka in a namesake Homeric epic.

ANSWER: Odysseus

Result: 1347 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 05.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 2146

Question: Shu and Tefnut were created from this god's saliva. According to one legend, this deity emerged out of chaos from a lotus flower. Every night, this god's barque was attacked by the snake Apep. This deity colored 7,000 jars of beer red in order to calm Sekhmet, who is known as this god's "eye." This god was unified with (*) Atem and Amun. Like Horus, this deity was depicted with the head of a falcon, and he was also depicted with a golden disk. Pharaohs were titled the "Son of" this god. For 10 points, name this Egyptian sun deity.

ANSWER: Ra

Result: 1348 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 08.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 2233

Question: Central to the cult of Mithra was Mithra's slaughter of this kind of animal. Seated images of this animal act as gatekeepers in temples venerating Parvati and Shiva, who rides one called Nandi. In Minoan civilization, youths partook in leaping over this animal by grabbing its (*) horns. The sacrifice of Athenians for that practice sent Theseus to Crete to kill a creature that had the head of this animal. For 10 points, identify this animal represented in myth by the Minotaur and the constellation Taurus.

ANSWER: bulls [or cows]

Result: 1349 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 08.pdf | Question: 23 | Mythology | ID: 2237

Question: A Spartan festival dedicated to this Greek goddess required boys to try to steal cheese from an altar that was guarded by men with whips. She caused the death of the Aloadae brothers by tricking them to throw spears at each other, and in another story she punished Niobe for boasting by killing her seven daughters. This daughter of (*) Leto had a temple at Ephesus and was responsible for the deaths of the hunters Orion and Actaeon. For 10 points, name this twin sister of Apollo, the Greek goddess of the hunt and wild animals.

ANSWER: Artemis [do not accept "Diana"]

Result: 1350 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 09.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 2248

Question: At one point, this animal becomes a cedar leaf in order to steal light from a greedy chief named Logobola. According to the Haida, he brought salmon and berries to a clam shell to feed the first humans. A Manataka story tells of how his power to conjure up buffalo meat caused embarrassment for (*) Coyote, in one of many mythologies that consider him either a trickster god or a benefactor of humans. For 10 points, name this creature, which is seen in many Native American mythologies, and is a black bird that in European cultures symbolizes death.

ANSWER: Raven [or Chulyen; or Hemaskas; or Guguyni; or Nankil'slas; or Kwekwaxa'we; or

Result: 1351 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 09.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 2253

Question: After this deity was impregnated by Iasion, she gave birth to the god of wealth Plutus. She was worshiped in Arcadia as a woman with the head of a horse because Poseidon turned into a stallion to rape her. The Eleusinian Mysteries were held in honor of this goddess and her daughter. She gave Triptolemus a winged chariot pulled by snakes to help him teach the world agriculture during her search for her (*) daughter, who was abducted into the underworld by Hades. For 10 points, name this mother of Persephone, the Greek goddess of grain and the harvest.

ANSWER: Demeter

Result: 1352 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 10.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 2262

Question: The perpetrator of these events was aided in carrying out one of these when he told the truth to Diana, who healed the Hind of Ceryneia that he had been sent to capture. Another of these events saw its perpetrator drive away the flock of Symphalian Birds. These goals were completed after a man diverted the course of a river to (*) clean the Augean Stables. The capture of Cerberus and the slaying of the Hydra were also among, for 10 points, what group of tasks completed by a certain mythical hero of great strength?

ANSWER: labors of Hercules

Result: 1353 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 10.pdf | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 2282

Question: With his twin brother, this figure stole bones from the underworld and used them to create humans. A rival of this deity is (*) Tezcatlipoca (TETZ-cat-lee-POKE-uh), and the arrival of a certain conquistador was mistaken as the return of this figure. Confused by the natives with Hernan Cortes, for 10 points, identify this Aztec god, a feathered serpent.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 1354 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 13.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 2345

Question: This god teamed up with Aegipan (EYE-gih-pon) to recover Zeus's missing sinews from Typhon (TIE-fun). His role in the Trojan War included gathering the three goddesses together for the Judgment of Paris. Shortly thereafter, he was sent to (*) bring the magic herb mole (MO-lay) to Odysseus. This son of Zeus and Maia was the protector of merchants and guided the dead to Hades, in addition to being the messenger god. For 10 points, identify this Greek counterpart of the Roman Mercury, who flew about with his winged sandals.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 1355 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 15.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 2377

Question: This figure's enemies included Camilla of the Volsci and Turnus of the Rutuli, whom he defeated to avenge Pallas. His father was a mortal lover of Aphrodite, whom he carried on his back out of a burning city. His son (*) Ascanius founded Alba Longa, a precursor of Rome. After landing at Carthage, he had an affair with Dido, whom he later spurned. For 10 points, name this hero of an epic poem by Virgil.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 1356 | HSAPQ Tournament 15 | 2011 | Round: 15.pdf | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 2387

Question: In one story, one of this deity's sons is a war god that was raised by six women, resulting in the formation of his six faces; that son is named Skanda. He is attended by the Ganas and is the husband of Parvati, who bore him another son with an elephant's head. This rider of the bull Nandi also has a blue (*) throat from drinking the world's poison and has a third eye in his forehead whose opening will cause the destruction of the universe. For 10 points, name this Hindu deity, a member of the Trimurti known as the Destroyer.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 1357 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 01.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 2418

Question: The brothers Plexippus and Toxeus were killed over the pelt of one of these animals, one of which was captured shortly after the death of the centaur Pholus. That animal was captured after it had been driven into a snow bank and caused King Eurystheus to hide in a bronze jar. Since King Oeneus did not pay tribute to her, Artemis sent one of these creatures to rampage the countryside; that animal was killed by (*) Meleager, who attempted to award its pelt to Atalanta. For 10 points, name this animal which had Erymanthian and Calydonian varieties.

ANSWER: wild boar [prompt on wild pig]

Result: 1358 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 02.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 2422

Question: A celestial ruler in this myth system contemplated his navel for a billion eons. In this mythology, there were originally nine suns, eight of which were shot down by a great archer. This myth system states that the world originated from (*) Panku's cosmic egg. Another figure in this mythology owned a pole whose size he could change at will and accompanied a monk on the Journey to the West. For 10 points, name this myth system that features the Jade Emperor and the Monkey King.

ANSWER: Chinese mythology [or Daoist mythology]

Result: 1359 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 03.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 2454

Question: During a contest against her brother, this deity chewed on pieces of a sword and spat them out to in order to produce children. Worshipped at a shrine at Ise, she was born when her father was cleaning his left eye after returning from the underworld Yomi. After her brother threw a flayed horse into her hall, this goddess hid in a cave and refused to come out, putting the world in darkness. This daughter of (*) Izanagi and sister of the storm god Susanoo is considered to be one of the most important kami (kah-MEE). For 10 points, name this Shinto sun goddess.

ANSWER: Amaterasu omikami [or ohiru-menomuchi-no-kami]

Result: 1360 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 03.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 2463

Question: A cult of this deity was characterized by the sacrifice of puppies to Enyalio. The eagle owl, woodpecker, and vulture are sacred to this deity. This god exacts revenge for the rape of his daughter Alcippe and is forced to appear in a tribunal held by the Olympians held on a hill which later bore this god's name. With his lover, this father of Harmonia is caught in a (*) net crafted by Hephaestus. Cadmus slew a water-dragon sacred to this deity, who is known for only consorting with Aphrodite. For 10 points, name this Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares [or Mars]

Result: 1361 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 05.pdf | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 2500

Question: One story about the fate of this object was likely inspired by the tale of Batradz, culture hero of the Alans. Its name is ultimately derived from the Latin word for "steel." In early texts, it is Girflet who discards this object; in later tales, a mysterious hand drags it beneath the water when it is thrown away by (*) Bedivere. Nimue is sometimes said to have provided this object, though other tales claim that it was forged to replace the broken Sword in the Stone. The Lady of the Lake bestows, for 10 points, what magical sword wielded by King Arthur?

ANSWER: Excalibur [or Caliburn]

Result: 1362 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 06.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 2521

Question: This character tells a man in disguise her dream that twenty geese feeding at her trough are killed by a great eagle. She tests that man's identity by ordering Euryclea to move a bed containing a live olive tree as one of its legs. This woman deceives men such as Eurymachus and Antinous by sewing a burial (*) shroud by day and unraveling it by night to delay her remarriage. Her suitors are finally killed after her long-lost husband returns to Ithaca. For 10 points, name this faithful wife of Odysseus in the Odyssey.

ANSWER: Penelope

Result: 1363 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 06.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 2527

Question: This figure was worshiped on the Island of Philae. In depictions, a throne symbol often lies atop this deity's head. This deity created a snake out of the earth and had it bite Ra so that Ra would give up his True Name. After a long search, this deity found a box hidden in a tamarisk tree. This goddess reassembled the fourteen (*) pieces of her husband and gave birth to Horus, in order that he would defeat Set. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the wife and sister of Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis

Result: 1364 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 07.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 2538

Question: This figure's downfall began after he made vows both to never refuse any meat offered to him and to never eat dog meat. This man killed his own son, Connla, with a barbed spear called Gae Bulg, and in one event, battles a shapeshifting figure called the Morrigan before being healed by his father Lugh; that action occurred during the (*) Cattle Raid of Cooley at which he foiled the plans of Queen Maeve. For 10 points, name this mythical hero of the Ulster cycle who received his name after killing the hound of the smith Culann.

ANSWER: Cu Culainn [or Setanta]

Result: 1365 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 11.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 2632

Question: Along with Aegipan, this deity takes back the sinews of Zeus that had been stolen by Typhon. He tells Atreus that he can be king of Mycenae if the sun goes backwards. Along with Zeus, he receives the hospitality of Baucis and Philemon. He steals the cattle of Apollo and invents the (*) lyre on the first day after his mother Maia gives birth to him. His symbols include the caduceus and the winged sandals that he uses to execute his duty of messenger. For 10 points, name this Greek counterpart to Mercury.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 1366 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 12.pdf | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 2670

Question: After this man was cast to sea with his mother in a wooden chest, the two were taken in by a fisherman named Dictys. It was the intentions of Dictys's brother Polydectes towards this man's mother that would eventually inspire him to go on his most notable quest after he was tasked with obtaining an impossible wedding present because he was too poor to afford a horse. That quest would lead him to acquire some winged sandals, a helm of invisibility, and a (*) reflective shield, which would come in handy against his adversary's stone gaze. For 10 points, name this son of Danae who slew Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 1367 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 13.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 2679

Question: After saving Hesione from a sea monster, this figure killed her father Laomedon when he didn't receive his payment. He borrowed the goblet of Helios to cross the sea. He spent three years as Omphale's servant after killing Iphitus. This figure killed Antaeus by lifting him from the ground and scared away the Stymphalian birds by making noise. He diverted some rivers to clean the (*) Augean stables for Eurystheus. As a child of Zeus and Alcmene, he was antagonized his whole life by Hera. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who completed twelve labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 1368 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 14.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 2708

Question: One form of this deity slew a foe with a thousand arms using an axe, while another form of this deity with the aspect of a fish saved Manu and therefore all of humankind. A third form of this deity had the aspect of a tortoise and participated in the churning of the ocean, while a fourth form of this deity is the namesake of a story told by Valmiki. Those forms, known as this deity's (*) avatars, also include Krishna, who advises Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. For 10 points, name this member of the Trimurti known as the preserver who is contrasted with Brahma and Shiva.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 1369 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 14.pdf | Question: 23 | Mythology | ID: 2718

Question: This figure transformed the nymph Caenis into a male warrior who was killed after being pounded into the ground by centaurs, and with Tyro this figure fathered Neleus and Pelias. Along with Aegeus, this immortal fathered Theseus, and also fathered Arion after mating with his sister Demeter in the form of a stallion. This god of horses sent King Minos the bull that became the father of the minotaur, and also sought revenge on (*) Odysseus for killing another of his sons, the Cyclops Polyphemus, by increasing the length of his journey home by causing a massive storm that shipwrecked him. For 10 points, name this Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 1370 | HSAPQ Tournament 16 | 2011 | Round: 15.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 2734

Question: In one story, this god manages to get help from Baugi and Gunnlod in stealing from Suttung a special mead made from the blood of a man. This god decided to give up one of his eyes in order to take a drink from the well guarded by Mimir to increase his knowledge. Another attempt to gain knowledge involved this god (*) hanging himself for nine days from Yggdrasil to learn the secrets of the runes. For 10 points, name this Norse deity who wields the spear Gungnir, rides the eight-legged horse Sleipnir, and controls the ravens Hugin and Munin.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wotan; or Woden]

Result: 1371 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-01.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 2744

Question: After lying to another deity with a flower, he was cursed to no longer be worshipped on earth. This god's city is found within the heavens situated atop Mount Meru. After assuming the form of a swan, this figure was attacked after lying about reaching one end of the lingam. This led to him losing one of his five heads, with which he saw in every direction. Using his own substance, he created his consort, Sarasvati. In his four (*) arms, he carries a water jug, a scepter, a bow or spoon, and the Vedas. For 10 points, name this creator god of the Hindu trimurti.

ANSWER: Brahma

Result: 1372 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-01.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 2761

Question: When Finn Maccool met his wife, Sadhbh (SAHV), she was in the form of this animal. Four of these animals attack the World-Tree Yggdrasil (EEG-drah-seel) in Norse myth. In Greek myth, Heracles pursues one of these animals for a year as one of his labors. That Ceryneian (keh-rih-NAY-uhn) one of these animals belonged to (*) Artemis, whose chariot is pulled by these animals, and who turns Actaeon (ack-TAY-on) into one of them. For 10 points, name this horned animal, which is hunted by hounds.

ANSWER: deer [or harts; or stag]

Result: 1373 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-02.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 2772

Question: In Orphic tradition, this god is known as Phanes and is called the firstborn. The story of this male god and his love is first told in The Golden Ass, by Lucius Apuleius (app-uh-LAY-us). In that story, this figure leaves his lover after she drops oil on him while trying to see his face. This figure fathers Hedone (hud-OWN-ay), goddess of (*) pleasure, with his wife, the mortal Psyche. For 10 points, name this son of Aphrodite and Ares, a love god depicted with wings and a bow.

ANSWER: Eros [or Cupid]

Result: 1374 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-04.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 2817

Question: One story from this nation's mythology relates how a man who went to the underworld to regain his beloved was shocked to see her transformed into ugliness after she had eaten the food of the dead. That couple had improperly performed a marriage ceremony, rendering them unable to give birth to healthy offspring. One story from this country's mythology sees its sun deity (*) scared into hiding in a cave to evade the wrath of her brother. For 10 points, name this nation whose deities include Amaterasu and many beings known as kami.

ANSWER: Japan

Result: 1375 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-05.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 2843

Question: In one story, this god is the first to be tried for murder after killing Halirrhothius to protect his daughter Alcippe (al-KIP-ee). This god was trapped in a giant bronze bar by giants called the Aloadae (ah-LOW-uh-dye). Through Rhea Silvia, this god is sometimes credited with fathering Romulus and Remus. He angers (*) Hephaestus by sleeping with Aphrodite and is accompanied by personifications of terror and fear named Phobos and Deimos. For 10 points, name this Greco-Roman god of war.

ANSWER: Ares [or Mars]

Result: 1376 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-07.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 2877

Question: One of these figures, Phoebe, was the mother of Leto. One of them named Mnemosyne (neh-MAZ-uh-nee) was the personification of memory and the mother of Clio, Calliope, and the other Muses. One of them named Oceanus was the father of three thousand namesake children. Tethys and Iapetus (YAHP-eh-tus) were other examples of these figures, one of whom was (*) chained to a rock where an eagle ate his liver. For 10 points, Prometheus, Cronus, and Rhea are examples of what giant deities who fought with the Olympians?

ANSWER: Titans

Result: 1377 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-07.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 2884

Question: One goddess of this culture was killed by four hundred of her children after she was impregnated by a ball of feathers, after which these people's war god sprung fully armed from the womb. Another god of these people was represented by a smoky obsidian mirror. Mictlan is the underworld of this culture. Legend holds that this culture's ruler mistook (*) Hernan Cortes for their feathered-serpent god. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican civilization that worshiped the god Quetzalcoatl (KETZ-ul-co-AH-tul).

ANSWER: the Aztecs

Result: 1378 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-08.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 2912

Question: This Greek deity is frequently referred to as Kore (KOR-ay). The attempt by Pirithous (PEER-ith-oos) and Thesus to marry this woman led to their feet being coiled with snakes. One incident involving this woman led to the creation of the Sirens; that incident started with this woman picking flowers on the plain of Enna. This woman's consumption of (*) pomegranate seeds bound her to her captor for one third of each year, explaining the origins of winter. For 10 points, name this woman abducted by Hades and made Queen of the underworld, the daughter of Demeter.

ANSWER: Persephone

Result: 1379 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-09.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 2924

Question: The advisor Aeschere (ASH-er-uh) is killed in retribution for the death of this character. His slayer is rewarded with a necklace by Queen Wealtheow (WEE-al-thow) and this character is apparently provoked by the sound of singing soldiers. He is killed by a warrior from Geatland who fights unarmed and tears off his shoulder. He attacks the mead hall Heorot (HAIR-ut) of the Danish King Hrothgar (ROTH-gar). His death provokes the wrath of his (*) mother, who lives at the bottom of a lake. For 10 points, name this monster killed in the first part of Beowulf.

ANSWER: Grendel

Result: 1380 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-11.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 2967

Question: One of these objects could not be moved without the help of the giantess Hyrrokin. Another one of them made of fingernails will appear at Ragnarok; those objects are Hringhorni and Naglfar. The Sons of Ivaldi made another one of these objects for Freyr which could be folded and put in a pocket and float through the air called Skidbladnir. In Greek myth, one of these (*) vessels was made out of sacred oak, transported Jason to retrieve the Golden Fleece, and was named the Argo. For 10 points, name this form of water transportation.

ANSWER: ships [or boats]

Result: 1381 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-12.pdf | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 3007

Question: One character in this work has the ability to understand birdsong but must not tell anyone what he hears under penalty of death. After that character banishes his wife for insolence, his daughter falls under the care of the evil hunchback Manthara. Later in this poem, Manthara suggests to Kaikeyi (kai-KAY-ee) that she demand her son Bharata be installed as the next king. The main conflict of this work begins when a (*) demon disguised as a golden deer helps capture Sita. For 10 points, identify this Hindu epic in which the title hero defeats Ravana.

ANSWER: the Ramayana

Result: 1382 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-14.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 3047

Question: One clan that sacrificed to this god mingled human entrails with that of an animal's at Mount Lykaion (LIKE-ey-on). This deity was granted one attribute out of gratitude for release from imprisonment by the Cyclopes. Guises assumed by this deity include a shower of gold and a swan. Children of this deity include Helen of Troy, along with Castor and Pollux. This god forced his father, (*) Cronus, to vomit up this deity's siblings, which included Demeter, Hades, Poseidon, and his wife, Hera. For 10 points, name this thunder god and head of the Greek pantheon.

ANSWER: Zeus

Result: 1383 | HSAPQ Tournament 17 | 2011 | Round: tournament17-15.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 3060

Question: Vietnamese king Le Loi was said to receive one of these objects enscribed with the words "The Will of Heaven" from a turtle. One of these objects was found in the body of an eight headed serpent killed by Susano'o. In the epic of Beowulf, Hrunting and Naegling are magic forms of this object. After the wounding of the owner of one of these objects, Bedivere casts that object into a (*) body of water where a hand emerged to catch it. That wounded owner had previously retrieved one of these objects from a stone. For 10 points, name this form of weapon, an example of which is King Arthur's Excaliber.

ANSWER: swords

Result: 1384 | HSAPQ VHSL Districts | 2011 | Round: districts-01.pdf | Question: 29 | Mythology | ID: 3098

Question: This figure killed a centaur who tricked his wife into giving him a supposed love potion which was actually poison. His last wife was Hebe, whom he married after his apotheosis. His feats include strangling two snakes sent by Hera to kill him, and capturing a deer sacred to Artemis. As penance for killing his children and his wife Megara, he became the slave of Eurystheus (yur-ISS-thee-us), who tasked him with capturing Cerberus and killing the Nemean lion. For 10 points, name this hero who performed twelve labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules before "Artemis" is read; do not accept "Hercules" after "Artemis" is

Result: 1385 | HSAPQ VHSL Districts | 2011 | Round: districts-02.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 3103

Question: After this figure's nephew invented the saw, this figure jealously threw that nephew, Talos, off of a cliff. This man used an ant to thread a conch shell while staying with King Cocalus, with whom he conspired to kill King Minos. This man escaped from imprisonment in Knossos with his son, who drowned in the sea after flying too close to the sun. For 10 points, name this father of Icarus who designed the Labyrinth.

ANSWER: Daedalus

Result: 1386 | HSAPQ VHSL Districts | 2011 | Round: districts-02.pdf | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 3118

Question: In Aztec myth, this event happened with the birth of Ometeotl (oh-may-tee-AHT-l) or after Ometeotl's (oh may-tee-AHT-lz) children killed the sea-monster Cipactli (kee-PAKT-lee). In other Aztec traditions, it happened with the dawning of the Fifth Sun. In Chinese myth, it happened after Pangu emerged from the cosmic egg. In Greek myth, Nyx is born right after this event, which is preceded by a void called Chaos. For 10 points, name this action accomplished by God in the Book of Genesis in six days.

ANSWER: creating the world [or obvious equivalents; do not accept or prompt "creating man"]

Result: 1387 | HSAPQ VHSL Districts | 2011 | Round: districts-03.pdf | Question: 25 | Mythology | ID: 3149

Question: This figure once masqueraded as Bolverk to gain access to a substance made after the murder of Kvasir (kuh-VAH-sear). One of this deity's sons will avenge his death at Ragnarok using a shoe. This possessor of the spear Gungnir rides an eight-legged horse who is the child of Loki. This god is attended to by Huginn and Muninn. The tribute that this god paid to be able to drink from Mimir's well means that he has only one eye. For 10 points, name this husband of Frigg, the chief god of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin

Result: 1388 | HSAPQ VHSL Districts | 2011 | Round: districts-04.pdf | Question: 33 | Mythology | ID: 3182

Question: One god of these people created the moon by tossing his sister's head into the sky after defeating her and his 400 brothers. After being impregnated by a ball of feathers, another deity of these people gave birth to twins, one of whom fights Tezcatlipoca (tez-KAHT-lee-POH-kuh) and is depicted as a "feathered serpent." For 10 points, name these Mesoamerican people who misidentified Hernan Cortes to be their god Quetzalcoatl (KET-zul-koh-AH-tul).

ANSWER: Aztecs

Result: 1389 | HSAPQ VHSL Districts | 2011 | Round: districts-05.pdf | Question: 30 | Mythology | ID: 3208

Question: This figure successively wielded white shields with one, two, and three red bands to conquer Dolorous Guard. While staying with King Pelles, he was tricked into sleeping with Elaine, resulting in the birth of his son Galahad. He is sometimes nicknamed "of the lake" because he was raised by the Lady of the Lake, and in most sources, he is unable to find the Holy Grail because of his relationship with the wife of King Arthur. For 10 points, name this lover of Queen Guinevere, the strongest knight of the Round Table.

ANSWER: Lancelot du Lac

Result: 1390 | HSAPQ VHSL Districts | 2011 | Round: districts-06.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 3218

Question: This man's grandfather, Acrisius (uh-CRISS-ee-us), locked up this man's mother in a bronze tower, although she was eventually impregnated by Zeus in the form of gold. This son of Danae (duh-NAY-uh) was able to obtain valuable information after stealing the one tooth and eye shared among the Graeae (GRAY-eye). This man rescued Andromeda and used winged sandals and the cap of Hades (HAY-dees) in another task. For 10 points, name this mythological hero who used a reflecting shield to kill Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 1391 | HSAPQ VHSL Districts | 2011 | Round: districts-06.pdf | Question: 31 | Mythology | ID: 3239

Question: This god was honored at the festival of Thargelia (thar-GELL-ee-uh), in which two ugly men of Athens were draped in figs and cast out of the community. This god purified himself in the waters of the Pineios (pin-AY-os) River after killing Python. He flayed Marsyas (MAR-see-us) and gave King Midas asses' ears after Midas voted for Marsyas over this god in a lyre playing contest. For 10 points, Daphne was turned into a laurel after being chased by what Greek god of music?

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 1392 | HSAPQ VHSL Districts | 2011 | Round: districts-07.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 3247

Question: This god briefly regained life after his wife transformed into a kite to wave air into him. During the Middle Kingdom the god Ptah became assimilated with this god, and this god's son is typically depicted with the head of a falcon. Along with his brother the god of chaos this god was one of two sons of Geb and Nut and this god was also the father of Horus and husband of Isis. This god was killed by his brother Seth, who chopped up his body into many pieces. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Osiris

Result: 1393 | HSAPQ VHSL Districts | 2011 | Round: districts-08.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 3289

Question: As this figure's ship sailed, rotten planks were replaced with new ones, leading to a philosophical problem concerning whether the original ship remained. Parts of this man's thighs were left in the underworld after he Pirithous were stuck to magical chairs. He killed a robber who forced victims to conform to the size of his bed named Procrustes. Aided by Ariadne's ball of string, this figure slew the Minotaur in the labyrinth. For 10 points, name this man who founded Athens and served as its first king.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 1394 | HSAPQ VHSL Regionals | 2011 | Round: regionals-02.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 3320

Question: One clan that sacrificed to this deity intermingled human entrails with that of the animal's at Mouth Lykaion (LIKE-ey-on). This deity was granted one attribute out of gratitude for release from imprisonment by the Cyclopes. Guises assumed by this deity include a shower of gold and a swan. Children of this deity include Helen of Troy, along with Castor and Pollux. This god forced his father, Cronus, to vomit up this deity's siblings, which included Demeter, Hades, Poseidon, and his wife, Hera. For 10 points, name this thunder god and head of the Greek pantheon.

ANSWER: Zeus

Result: 1395 | HSAPQ VHSL Regionals | 2011 | Round: regionals-03.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 3333

Question: One story from the mythology of this nation relates how a man who went to the underworld to regain his beloved was shocked to see her transformed into ugliness after she had eaten the food of the dead; that couple had earlier improperly performed a marriage ceremony, rendering them unable to give birth to healthy offspring. One story from this country's mythology sees its sun deity scared into hiding in a cave to evade the wrath of her brother. For 10 points, name this nation whose mythological heritage includes such figures as Izanami, Amaterasu, and many beings known as Kami.

ANSWER: Japan

Result: 1396 | HSAPQ VHSL Regionals | 2011 | Round: regionals-04.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 3346

Question: This figure has a dialogue with the giant Vafprudnir (VAF-prude-neer) in the Vafprudnismal (VAF-prude-nees-mall). He disguised himself as a stranger to test the generosity of Grimnir. This mythological figure sacrificed an eye for the water of Mimisbrunnr (MEE-mees-broon). This god's son Vidar will avenge this figure's death at the hands of the Fenris wolf. This husband of Frigg was the father of Balder. For 10 points, name this chief god of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wotan; or Woden]

Result: 1397 | HSAPQ VHSL Regionals | 2011 | Round: regionals-08.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 3399

Question: After lying to another deity with the help of a flower, he was cursed, such that he was no longer worshipped on earth. This god's city is found within the heavens situated atop Mount Meru. After assuming the form of a swan, this figure was attacked after lying about reaching one end of the lingam. This led to him losing one of his heads, and left him with four, with which he saw in every direction. Using his own substance, he created his consort, Sarasvati. In his four arms, he carries a water jug, a scepter, a bow or spoon, and the Vedas. For 10 points, identify this creator god among the Hindu trimurti.

ANSWER: Brahma

Result: 1398 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 05.pdf | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 3453

Question: One god associated with this object sometimes has his chariot drawn by a horse with seven heads and is named Surya. In Norse myth, the wolf Skoll chases this object, which was captured in Polynesian myth by Maui and his brothers. This object is also associated with the Shinto kami Amaterasu and in Hindu myth it was almost eaten by Hanuman, who mistook it for some ripe fruit in the sky. Often seen as a chariot being drawn across the sky, this is, for 10 points, what celestial object which is also associated with the Egyptian god Ra and the Greek god Helios?

ANSWER: the Sun

Result: 1399 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 08.pdf | Question: 34 | Mythology | ID: 3482

Question: This deity was caught in a compromising position with another deity's wife when he became trapped in an invisible net. In another story, he was trapped in a bronze urn for a very long duration by two giants named Otus and Ephialtes. The Stymphalian Birds were associated with this god who, with his lover Aphrodite, sired the children Deimos and Phobos, who often accompanied him into combat. The god of battle and war, for 10 points, name this Greek deity, whose Roman counterpart was Mars.

ANSWER: Ares

Result: 1400 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 10.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 3525

Question: In the Odyssey, this Greek god gave Odysseus the Moly herb to help ward off Circe. After Zeus's affair with Semele, this Greek god was forced to protect the infant Dionysus. With Dryope, this god was the father of Pan, the god of shepherds. This Greek god who carried the staff Cadaceus was the god of liars and travelers and was given a pair of golden footwear by Hephaestus. For 10 points, name this Greek god known for his winged sandals who serves as a messenger.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 1401 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 11.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 3552

Question: This killer of the satyr Marsyas served as Kind Admetus's shepherd for a year as punishment for killing the Cyclops that provided the lightning bolt that Zeus used to kill his son Ascelpius (uh-SKLEE-pee-uhs). This son of Leto killed the children of Niobe. He romantically pursued a nymph who turned into a laurel tree; that nymph was named Daphne. This twin brother of Artemis also procured a lyre from Hermes. For 10 points, name this Greek god of light and music.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 1402 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 12.pdf | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 3589

Question: This god slew Fimafeng in the hall of Aegir. The son of Farbauti and Laufey, this deity fathered Narvi and Vali on his wife Sigyn, who holds up a bowl to catch a serpent's poison dripping on him. This god convinced the blind Hoedr to hurl a shaft of mistletoe at Baldr, thereby killing him. With the giantess Angrboda, this figure fathered such monsters as the Fenris Wolf and the Midgard Serpent. For 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 1403 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 13.pdf | Question: 31 | Mythology | ID: 3628

Question: These figures were raised by Faustulus (FOUST-yuh-luhs) and Acca Larentia (AH-kuh luh-REN-shee-uh). These figures removed Amulius (uh-MYOO-lee-uhs) from the throne, restoring their grandfather King Numitor. These sons of Mars and Rhea Silvia were suckled by Lupa, a she-wolf. One of them saw twelve eagles over Palatine Hill, which the other mocked by jumping over it. For 10 points, name these twin brothers who founded ancient Rome.

ANSWER: Romulus and Remus [both names required; can be given in either order]

Result: 1404 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 14.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 3645

Question: One text that provides information about this myth system is the Chilam Balam, while a more notable text describes an underworld that is situated by a river of blood, and is called Xibalba. That region was visited by this myth system's Hero Twins, as detailed in the text Popul Vuh. For 10 points, name this myth system of a Mesoamerican civilization that preceded the Aztecs.

ANSWER: Mayan myth

Result: 1405 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 15.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 3671

Question: In one story, this god's wife stole gold from a statue of him, prompting him to go into exile. Among his possessions are the golden throne from which he can see the entire world and a ring that multiplied itself every night. This son of Borr and brother of Vili and Ve also owns a spear that never misses its target, Gugnir, and the eight-legged horse Sleipnir. He will be killed by the wolf Fenrir at Ragnarok and he also obtained perfect wisdom by trading one of his eyes to drink from Mimir's well. For 10 points, name this leader of the Aesir, a chief Norse deity.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wodin or Wotan]

Result: 1406 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 15.pdf | Question: 28 | Mythology | ID: 3685

Question: This author wrote about a group of girls trapped in Thebes on their way from Syria to Delphi in The Phoenician Women. This author used Stesichorus's idea that Helen went to Egypt instead of Troy as the basis for another play. In another play by this man, Pentheus refuses to believe that Dionysus is the son of Zeus and is torn apart by a group of wild women including his own mother. This author also wrote about a woman who sends a poisoned dress to Glauce and then kills her own children before departing in a dragon-drawn chariot. For 10 points, name this ancient Greek author of The Bacchae and Medea.

ANSWER: Euripides

Result: 1407 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 16.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 3700

Question: In one myth, this god fails in his attempts to court his wife until he seduces her in the guise of a cuckoo. He tricks another of his lovers into turning into a fly, then swallows her, only to find out that she was pregnant and that his daughter is causing him a massive headache. In another myth, this god draws lots with his brothers to see who controls the sky, the sea, and the underworld after he castrates and overthrows his father Cronus. For 10 points, name this philandering leader of the Greek gods who is married to the jealous Hera.

ANSWER: Zeus

Result: 1408 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 16.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 3709

Question: This figure's husband was given the task of giving good qualities to all animals, but he ran out before he could give one to man. That husband of this figure was warned by his brother to never accept a gift from Zeus. Hephaestus (heh-FESS-tuss) helped create this wife of Epimetheus (EP-uh-ME-thee-us) out of the earth and the air. This woman was given an object by Hermes that caused trouble due to her trait of curiosity. For 10 points, name this character from Greek mythology who released all evil into the world when she opened her box.

ANSWER: Pandora

Result: 1409 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 17.pdf | Question: 29 | Mythology | ID: 3748

Question: In many stories, this object is kept safe at Corbenic. The Dolorous Stroke maimed this object's keeper, the Fisher King. According to legend, this object could only be discovered by the man who could sit in the Siege Perilous without dying, and was taken to England by Joseph of Arimethea. According to Thomas Malory, it was finally attained by Sir Galahad. For 10 points, name this cup used by Jesus at the Last Supper, which many of the knights of King Arthur's Round Table went on a quest to find.

ANSWER: the Holy Grail

Result: 1410 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 18.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 3755

Question: One of these animals in Greek myth is Laelaps, who was converted to stone by Zeus along with its potential prey, the Teumissian Fox. Another example from Greek myth was Argos, who was unable to give away the disguise of a man whom he had not seen for many years due to his sudden death. In Norse myth, Garm was this type of animal. The best known example from Greek myth served as a guardian to the underworld. For 10 points, Cerberus had three heads of what kind of animal?

ANSWER: dogs

Result: 1411 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 18.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 3768

Question: At Colonus, this god was known as Hippios, and he was the divine ancestor of the royal families of Thessaly and Messenia. This god was the father of a man who stretched and chopped people into fitting into his bed, Procrustes, and this god's main festival was the Isthmia. He saw to Odysseus' stranding on Calypso's island due to Odysseus blinding his son, the cyclops Polyphemus.For 10 points, name this Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 1412 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 19.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 3798

Question: This god killed his evil wetnurse Putana by removing her internal organs, after being saved from his uncle Kamsa by a switch of wombs with Deva. The deadly Juggernaut was said to contain the bones of this god, who came between Rama and Buddha as the eighth avatar of Vishnu. In that role, he lectures Arjuna (ARJ-oo-nuh) on the justice of war, in a speech which comprises the Bhagavad-Gita. For 10 points, identify this Hindu god with dark blue skin, the subject of such devotional movements as the evangelizing, orange-robed "Hare" (HA-ray).

ANSWER: Krishna[prompt on Vishnu before it is read]

Result: 1413 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 19.pdf | Question: 29 | Mythology | ID: 3809

Question: In the Mabinogion, Lleu Llaw Gyffes turns into one of these animals after being wounded by a spear. A hawk named Vedrfolnir sits between the eyes of one of these animals in Norse myth. In one of Aesop's fables, this animal's home is burned by a fox. The cupbearer Ganymeade is abducted by Zeus in the form of this animal, which is often depicted eating the liver of Prometheus. For 10 points, name this majestic bird whose "bald" variety is important in the American mythos.

ANSWER: eagles

Result: 1414 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 20.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 3823

Question: This god owned the Stymphallian Birds and had his son Cycnus killed by Heracles. Heracles managed to injure this god with an arrow in the thigh, and he was held captive in a jar by the Aloadae. This god was caught in a sturdy but invisible net after his affair with Aprhodite was uncovered by Hephaestus. This son of Zeus rode into battle with his sons Phobos and Deimos. For 10 points, name this analogue of Mars, the Greekgod of warfare.

ANSWER: Ares [or Mars before mentioned]

Result: 1415 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 20.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 3829

Question: In one story, Pirathous and Theseus are trapped in this location by a snakes that tie them to a chair. One part of this location is ruled by the Cretan Rhadamanthus and another is called the Asphodel Meadows. Rivers in this location include Phlegethon, Cocytus, Acheron and Lethe. Residents of this place include the wheel-bound Ixion and Sisyphus, who must roll a boulder up a hill for eternity. For 10 points, name this place bounded by the river Styx and ruled by Persephone and its namesake god, the underworld in Greek mythology.

ANSWER: Hades [or Greek underworld until mentioned]

Result: 1416 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 21.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 3848

Question: In Welsh mythology, Gwydion intentionally sparks a war by stealing some of these animals from Pryderi. In Greek myth, Theseus kills the Crommyonian one of these animals. Examples of these animals in Norse mythology include the golden Gullinbursti and Sahrimnir, which is eaten every night by the heroes of Valhalla. Atalanta is one of the people who chase the Calydonian one. In the Odyssey, Odysseus's men are turned into this kind of animal by Circe. For 10 points, name this animal which is known for its gluttony.

ANSWER: pig [or boar; or sow]

Result: 1417 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 21.pdf | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 3852

Question: One character in this work tells his wife to bake a loaf of bread every day to prove that the title character fell asleep. The protagonist of this work gets a plant from the bottom of the ocean but has it stolen by a serpent. One character in this work is sentenced to death after he and the protagonist kill Humbaba and the Bull of Heaven. The protagonist of this work is two-thirds divine and grieves for his friend Enkidu while seeking immortality. For 10 points, name this Mesopotamian epic found on twelve tablets.

ANSWER: Epic of Gilgamesh

Result: 1418 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 22.pdf | Question: 30 | Mythology | ID: 3901

Question: This Greek goddess turned Gerana into a crane and gave Echo her unusual and distinctive punishment. This goddess was ultimately responsible for assigning the twelve labors to Heracles and banished Leto to the island of Delos where she gave birth to Artemis and Apollo. The peacock was sacred to this goddess, the mother of Hebe, Eris, and Ares, who uncovered her husband's affair with Io. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of marriage and birth who was the husband of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 1419 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 24.pdf | Question: 32 | Mythology | ID: 3968

Question: This deity transformed Medusa's hair into serpents, and the head of Medusa was placed on this goddess's shield, the aegis. In many stories, this goddess accidentally killed a childhood friend named Pallas before taking her name. The Parthenon was dedicated to this grey-eyed goddess, who served as a guide to Odysseus. She was the daughter of Metis although was born fully armed from the head of her father Zeus. For 10 points, name this analogue of Minerva, the Greek goddess of wisdom and war.

ANSWER: Athena [or Minerva until mentioned]

Result: 1420 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 25.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 3989

Question: In Maori mythology, Maui owns one of these objects that becomes the South Island of New Zealand. In Norse mythology, Frey owns one named Skidbladnir that can fit in a pocket but hold all the gods. Another one of these objects in Norse myth is made from fingernails and called Naglfar. Another one of these objects fits through the Symplegades rocks and carries Atalanta, Heracles, and Jason on the quest for the Golden Fleece. For 10 points, the Argo is an example of what floating object?

ANSWER: boats [or ships]

Result: 1421 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 26.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 4017

Question: This mythological figure wounded and healed Telephus. He killed Thersites (THUR-sit-ees) with one punch after Thersites mocked him for grieving over the Amazonian Penthesilea (pen-thuh-sill-EE-uh), whom he also killed. This master of the concubine Briseis (bris-EE-us) drags Hector's body around Troy after Hector kills his friend Patroclus. His mother Thetis made him immortal by dipping him in the River Styx but missed one key part. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who was killed by Paris's arrow to his heel.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 1422 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 26.pdf | Question: 31 | Mythology | ID: 4034

Question: In Norse myth, one of these objects belonging to Freyr was given to the giantess Gerd, which causes Freyr to use an antler in its place at Ragnarok. Examples from Celtic myth include Fragarach and Caladbolg, while in Shinto myth Susanoo uses one named Totsuka to defeat an eight-headed dragon, whose body contains one named Kusanagi. A better known object of this type was given to its owner by the Lady of the Lake or might have been pulled from a stone. For 10 points, name these objects which include King Arthur's Excalibur.

ANSWER: swords

Result: 1423 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 27.pdf | Question: 30 | Mythology | ID: 4065

Question: In one story, this figure tested his favorite mortal king Geirrod by visiting him in the guise of Grimnir. With the help of his brothers Vili and Ve, this figure killed the primordial giant Ymir. Master of the ravens Hugin and Munin, this figure will kill and be killed by the Fenris Wolf at Ragnarok. He gave up an eye to drink from the well of Mimir, and he is also called the "Allfather." For 10 points, name this supreme deity of the Norse Pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wotan]

Result: 1424 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 28.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 4069

Question: He's not Bacchus, but this deity was associated with Dionysus in the country with which he is most associated. This deity's soul was worshipped as the ram god Banebdjed, and he is frequently depicted holding a crook and flail. This deity is the father of Horus, and one story about this god tells how he was killed in the Nile after being chopped into pieces by his brother Set, though he was revived by Isis. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Osiris (accept Asar or Wesir or Ausare)

Result: 1425 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 28.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 4073

Question: The protagonist of this work encounters Siduri and Urshanabi when he travels to the mountain Mashu to talk to the survivor of a great flood named Utnapishtim. That journey comes after the death of the main character's friend, who had earlier helped the protagonist defeat Humbaba and later helped him slay the Bull of Heaven sent by Ishtar. The main character of this work is a king of Uruk and friend of Enkidu. For 10 points, name this ancient Mesopotamian epic poem.

ANSWER: Epic of Gilgamesh

Result: 1426 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 28.pdf | Question: 26 | Mythology | ID: 4093

Question: An incident involving a chieftainess ' open defiance of this deity is recounted in Tennyson's poem, "Kapiolani." That defiance consisted in eating ohelo berries, which are sacred to this deity without permission. Born from the female spirit, Haumea and Sky God Wakea, the appearance of glass threads or fibers near a geologic formation this deity is associated with is known as her hair. For 10 points, name this Hawaiian goddess of lightning, fire and volcanoes.

ANSWER: Pele

Result: 1427 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 29.pdf | Question: 29 | Mythology | ID: 4126

Question: One story about this type of animal tells of how he got his thin legs by being greedy for food from all of his friends. Another story about that animal of this type explains how he collected three items to become the owner of all stories. In Greek myth, a woman was changed into this type of animal after she won a contest and hanged herself. That contest resulting in the creation of this animal was against Athena in creating a tapestry. For 10 points, name this insect represented by the West African trickster figure Anansi and the Greek Arachne.

ANSWER: spiders [or Kwaku Anansi before "Greek myth" is read]

Result: 1428 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 30.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 4149

Question: One figure from the mythology of this country walks using the aid of an iron crutch and is known as a healer who dispenses remedies from his gourd. Another figure from the mythology of this country went through a series of ten trials and had the so-called yellow millet dream, in which he perceived the passing of time much faster than it really happened. Those figures are part of a group known as the Eight Immortals. This nation's stories also include those of the Yellow and Jade Emperors. For 10 points, name this country where Taoism was founded.

ANSWER: China

Result: 1429 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 31.pdf | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 4184

Question: This god's heart became the planet Venus after he lept onto a funeral pyre. This god's conflicts with the "Smoking Mirror" caused the destruction of four earths. After the creation of the barren fifth world, this god retrieved bones from Mictlan and used his blood to create men to populate that world. This brother of Xolotl was tricked by his rival Tezcatlipoca into his immolation and he was said to have sailed east on a raft of serpents to eventually return to his people. For 10 points, name this feathered serpent revered by the Aztecs.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 1430 | HSAPQ VHSL Regular Season | 2011 | Round: 32.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 4207

Question: This god traveled disguised as Freya after Thrymr stole one of this god's possessions. This deity questioned his daughter's suitor until the sun rose, turning that dwarf, Alvis, to stone. This god traveled in a chariot pulled by the goats Tooth-Grinder and Tooth-Gnasher. This deity threatens Loki to be silent four times, and this deity's wife, Sif, had her hair shorn by Loki. After fighting Jormungandr, this god will stumble back nine steps before dying, but not before slaying the beast with his hammer, Mjollnir. For 10 points, name this Norse thunder god.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 1431 | HSAPQ VHSL States | 2011 | Round: 01.pdf | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 4274

Question: A descendant of this woman, Jane Bolling, married Richard Randolph. According to William Strachey, her first marriage was to a warrior named Kocoum. Other names given to this woman include Matoaka and Rebecca, the latter of which she took after she was baptized at Henricus. She married a man who cultivated tobacco in Virginia named John Rolfe. She supposedly saved the life of John Smith. For 10 points, name this daughter of Powhatan who aided settlers at Jamestown.

ANSWER: Pocahontas

Result: 1432 | HSAPQ VHSL States | 2011 | Round: 02.pdf | Question: 23 | Mythology | ID: 4319

Question: This figure fought off Rhoikos (ROI-kohs) and Hylaios ("HIGH"-"lie"-ohs), two centaurs who tried to rape her. This daughter of Iasius ("I"-ay-see-us) fathered Parthenopaeus (par-thuh-noh-PEE-us), one of the Seven Against Thebes. After having sex in Cybele's (SIB-uh-lee's) temple, she is turned into a lion. Raised by a she-bear, this figure loses a footrace after three apples are thrown at her by her opponent Hippomenes (hi-POM-uh-neez). She also helps Meleager (mel-ee-ay-JER) kill the Calydonian (KAL-i-don-ee-uhn) Boar. For 10 points, name this only female Argonaut.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 1433 | HSAPQ VHSL States | 2011 | Round: 03.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 4343

Question: These people believed in a goddess named "mother tree" who appeared as a two-headed snake. In this people's origin myth, a golden stick was repeatedly pushed into the ground until sinking at a fertile place. These people believed in a rain god who kept the Milky Way in a jug. The creator of the world in this people's mythology announced his departure at Manta and walked away across the ocean, leaving daily affairs in the hands of such figures as Mama Quilla and the sun god Inti. For 10 points, name this people that worshipped Ilyapa and Viracocha from temples in modern-day Peru.

ANSWER: Inca [or Incans]

Result: 1434 | HSAPQ VHSL States | 2011 | Round: 05.pdf | Question: 25 | Mythology | ID: 4422

Question: The wandering of this deity leading to the creation of classes of mankind is detailed in the Rigsthula. Another name for this figure, Gullintanni, comes from this deity's golden teeth. This god was said to have senses so acute he could hear the sound of grass growing. This god fulfills his primary duty in defending Asgard by blowing his Gjallarhorn. For 10 points, name this Norse deity that kills and is killed by Loki at Ragnarok, and keeps watch over the rainbow bridge Bifrost (BUY-frost) as he waits for that day to come.

ANSWER: Heimdall [or Gullintanni before mentioned]

Result: 1435 | HSAPQ VHSL States | 2011 | Round: 06.pdf | Question: 30 | Mythology | ID: 4461

Question: One being associated with this entity is a son of Seven Macaw named Zipacna, while another figure associated with this was frequently depicted with a staff and is Serapis. Another deity of this location is the father of Horus who is said to preside over a ceremony in which a person's heart is weighed against a feather of Ma'at. Perhaps the most notable deity of this location is a possessor of the cap of invisibility, the brother of Zeus and Poseidon who is also associated with the dog Cerberus. For 10 points, name this region associated with the Eyptian Osiris and the Greek Hades.

ANSWER: the underworld [or gods of the underworld; or equivalents such as afterlife; prompt on death

Result: 1436 | HSAPQ VHSL States | 2011 | Round: 07.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 4472

Question: This hero delivered Thebes from the tyranny of the Minyans by slaying the Minyan king, Erginus. This man killed the monstrous Cacus in Italy to recover his stolen oxen. He bore the indignity of dressing in women's clothing while serving Queen Omphale (om-FAH-lee). In a fit of madness, this man killed his wife Megara and his eight children. He diverted the rivers Alpheius (al-FEE-us) and Peneius (peh-NEE-us) to cleanse the stables of King Augeus. For 10 points, name this Greek hero, who notably completed twelve labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 1437 | HSAPQ VHSL States | 2011 | Round: 07.pdf | Question: 31 | Mythology | ID: 4486

Question: This man managed to pass the Symplegades after he allowed a dove to fly through them, and, seeing it emerge alive on the other side, knew that he could pass through safely. This man's son Thessalus became king of Corinth after he defeated Acastus with the aid of Peleus, while his marriage to Creusa caused enmity between himself and his lover, who killed Creusa as well as her children by this man. That woman, Medea, had earlier helped this man achieve his most notable task in Colchis. For 10 points, name this leader of the Argonauts who acquired the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Jason

Result: 1438 | HSAPQ VHSL States | 2011 | Round: 08.pdf | Question: 25 | Mythology | ID: 4514

Question: Hymenaios was the Greek god of these events. The death of the fifty sons of Aegyptus occurred on the day of one of these events. The Lapiths drove the Centaurs from Mount Pelion to Aethicia after a great battle at one of these events. At Loki's suggestion, Thor pretends to participate in one of these events to retrieve Mjollnir from Thrym. Another of these events is marred when an uninvited Eris throws the Apple of Discord, prompting the Judgment of Paris and the Trojan War. For 10 points, name these events which occur between Thetis and Peleus and other couples.

ANSWER: weddings

Result: 1439 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 51661

Question: This figure fathered the twins Euneus and Nebrophonus with Hypsipyle on his visit to Lemnos. This brother of Promachus helped drive away the harpies from Phineas, and he was secretly trained by Chiron. He helped Hera cross the Anauros, and released a dove when going through the Symplegades. King Aeetes asked this figure to sow the teeth of a dragon, and Pelias received an oracle saying that this figure would harm him. For 10 points, name this leader of the Argonauts and the lover of Medea who recovered the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Jason [accept Easun]

Result: 1440 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 10 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 51854

Question: According to one myth, this figure's first wife became pregnant after consuming one of this figure's lice. He wrestled with the Lizard over whether humans should have hands, and attempted to stay awake all night in order to receive a new name. He eavesdropped on everyone while replacing the moon, and he created the star Arcturus while juggling his eyeballs. Sometimes known as the "Old Man," he is also credited with the creation of men by kicking a ball of mud. For 10 points, name this canine trickster god in Native American mythology.

ANSWER: Coyote

Result: 1441 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 2 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 51675

Question: This figure once disguised someone as Gorlois. As a child, he was almost sacrificed by Vortigern, but he saved himself by telling the king of a vision in which a white dragon defeats a red dragon. In one story, he was seduced and betrayed after mentoring Vivien. His downfall was arranged by Morgana le Fay, and according to legend, he built Stonehenge. This figure designed the Round Table, and he was a friend and adviser of Uther Pendragon. The creator of the test of the sword in the stone, For 10 points, name this legendary magician who advised King Arthur.

ANSWER: Merlin

Result: 1442 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 3 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 51697

Question: This deity received a new hand from his mother after she threw the previous one into the marshes. He was raised on the island of Chemmis, and was outraged when his mother withdrew the harpoon which had struck her target. His four sons guarded the canopic jars, and he won a boat race by using a wooden boat while his opponent used a boat made out of stone. Hathor restored his sight by pouring milk into his eyes, and he fought his evil uncle Set in order to avenge his father Osiris. For 10 points, name this falcon-headed Egyptian god.

ANSWER: Horus [accept Hor or Har or Heru or Harmakhis or Harpocrates or Harsiesis or Harakhte or Haroeris]

Result: 1443 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 4 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 51730

Question: This figure turned a peasant's child into an egg, and hid him in a flounder to keep him safe from Skrymsli. This father of Eisa brought Idun and her apple back to the Asgard from the giant Thiazi. He captured Andvari using a net given to him by Ran, and once lost an eating contest to fire. He mothered Sleipnir with the stallion Svadilfari, and his wife Sigyn caught the venom that would drop on him. He tricked Hoder into killing Balder with a spear of mistletoe. For 10 points, name this father of Hel and the wolf Fenrir, the trickster god of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 1444 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 5 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 51739

Question: This figure killed Mnemon for not reminding him to avoid killing any sons of Apollo. This figure wielded the spear used to heal the wound of Telephus at Argos, and Chiron taught him how to become the fastest mortal. He fell in love with the Trojan princess Polyxena, which eventually led to his demise. He refused to fight when Agamemnon took Briseis away from him, but returned later when his friend Patroclus was killed by Hector. For 10 points, name this Greek warrior who became nearly invincible when his mother Thetis dipped him in the River Styx by his heel.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 1445 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 6 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 51770

Question: This deity gave a bow to King Janaka, which Rama broke when he won the hand of Sita. He crushed the dwarf Apasmara with his right foot and yielded a trident that represented the three gunas. He is often depicted wearing the cobra Naga around his neck, and he swallowed the poison Halahala to obtain his blue throat. His vehicle is the white bull Nandi, and he is often depicted as Nataraja, the eternal dancer. His third eye destroys everything before it. For 10 points, name this husband of Parvati and destroyer god of the Hindu Trimurti.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 1446 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 7 | Question: 15 | Mythology | AmericanID: 51789

Question: This goddess turned Ascalabus in to a lizard when he mocked her for drinking an entire vessel of water. This goddess hid among the horses of King Onkios when fleeing from Poseidon, and advised Psyche to go beg Aphrodite for forgiveness. King Eleusis asked her to nurse his two sons, and she was interrupted by Metanira when turning Demophon immortal. She accidentally ate the shoulder of Pelops. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of grain and harvest, the mother of Persephone.

ANSWER: Demeter [accept Ceres before "Poseidon"]

Result: 1447 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 8 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 51812

Question: In one story, this figure engages in an insult exchange with the ferryman Harbarth. He killed a certain giant after that giant almost finished building Asgard, and he recovered his favorite weapon from Thrym by disguising himself as Freya. This deity failed to empty a drinking horn connected to the sea, and at Ragnarok, he will kill the Midgard Serpent. His most precious possessions are a pair of iron gloves, a belt of strength, and a hammer. For 10 points, name this thunder god of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 1448 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 51829

Question: One legend holds that one of these animals brought light into darkness by causing the seagull to drop its box of light. The Celtic goddess Morrigan was accompanied by three of these animals, and Apollo used one of these to spy on his lover Coronis. Legend states that a terrible disaster will befall England if these animals are not present at the Tower of London, and Odin owned a pair of these animals that whispered news into his ears, Huginn and Muninn. For 10 points, name these animals often believed to be the same as crows.

ANSWER: Ravens [accept Crows until mentioned; prompt on Birds]

Result: 1449 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 51837

Question: This god disguised himself as Enipeus in order to approach Tyro, fathering both Pelias and Neleus in the process. This god aided Amymone when a satyr attempted to assault her, and he sent a giant serpent to destroy King Laomedon and the walls of Troy. Pasiphae fell in love with a white bull that was sent to Minos by this god, who raped Medusa in the temple of Athena. Athena created an olive tree to defeat this god in a contest, and the blinding of his son Polyphemus caused him to curse Odysseus. This husband of Amphitrite is often depicted holding a trident. For 10 points, name this Greek god of the ocean.

ANSWER: Poseidon [accept Neptune]

Result: 1450 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 51865

Question: This mythological figure built a palace named Esharra after his greatest victory, and he gave his son Nabu a dragon named Mushussu. His father warned a figure of a great flood that would destroy mankind, and his four horses each held poison in their mouths. He organized the years into months after his victory over a monster. He created tornados with the winds given to him by Anu, and he disturbed a monster that he would later defeat with a net and an arrow. For 10 points, name this god who defeated Tiamat in a battle to become the chief god of Babylon.

ANSWER: Marduk [accept Bel]

Result: 1451 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2011 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 51892

Question: According to one myth, this figure kidnapped Anticlea and fathered Odysseus. His son was trampled to death by his own horses for dishonoring Aphrodite, and this figure secretly marked the hooves of his cattle to prove the theft of Autolycus. He created the Isthmian Games after finding the body of Melicertes, and he received a spring from Asophus for revealing the location of Aegina. He once captured the god of death, Thanatos, and he returned from the underworld to reprimand his wife Merope for denying him a proper funeral, then refused to return. For 10 points, name this figure who was condemned to roll a boulder up a hill for eternity.

ANSWER: Sisyphus

Result: 1452 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 39754

Question: This man hung spoils of honor on an oak tree after slaying a king of Caenina named Acron. In one story, he vanished after a storm cloud on the Goats' Marsh enveloped him. He avoided fighting the Antemnates after pleas from Hersilia, his wife. One traitor to this man asked for the bracelets on enemy soldiers' left arms; that woman, who was crushed by shields instead, was Tarpeia. This leader cursed all men who tried to leap over his low walls. This grandson of Numitor hosted a festival of Neptune attended by Titus Tatius's people, at which he authorized kidnappings. He was succeeded by Numa Pompilius, became the god Quirinus after death, and staked one claim after seeing twelve birds fly by. For 10 points, name this legendarily wolf-suckled founder who killed his brother Remus before founding Rome.

ANSWER: Romulus [prompt "Quirinus"]

Result: 1453 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 40235

Question: 20.	In one poem, this character asks another character to "Graze on my lips, and if those hills be dry, / Stray lower, where the pleasant fountains lie." In one epic, this figure provides the protagonists an island on which Tethys foretells of future conquests and acts near Melinde to calm a storm. This figure responds to Vasco da Gama's prayers in Canto IV of that epic, The Lusiads. In another work, she carries an assassinated leader's soul to heaven, upon which it turns into a comet; that leader is Julius Caesar in Ovid's Metamorphoses. In another epic, she appears before her son as a huntress, telling him to seek out a woman who fled Tyre and founded Carthage, named Dido. For 10 points, name this mother of Aeneas, a Roman goddess who inspires much love poetry.

ANSWER: Venus [do not accept or prompt "Aphrodite" at any point; prompt "Cytherea"]

Result: 1454 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 10 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 39309

Question: This figure's husband was purified by Acastus but dismembered Acastus' wife Astydameia. In the Aethiopis, this figure takes a vase of ashes to the white island of Leuce. After Dionysus was driven out of Thrace by Lycurgus, this figure sheltered him. Along with Eurynome, she took care of Hephaestus when he was flung out of Mt. Olympus. According to the Iliad, she summoned the Hecatoncheires to defend Zeus. She hid her son, disguised as Pyrrha, at Lycomedes' court. To avoid marrying the son of Aeacus, this figure shape-shifted but was ultimately subdued. Her wedding gifts included two talking horses and Eris' Golden Apple. For 10 points, name this wife of Peleus who used the water of the River Styx to make her son Achilles nearly invincible.

ANSWER: Thetis

Result: 1455 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 11 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 39148

Question: This god had a dwelling in a constellation resembling a bull's thigh, which we call the Great Bear. One text's utterances encourage the use an object stolen by this god to keep Unas's mouth open and adorn his face. Anat prayed for this god's recovery from illness. He had a temple at Avaris which Ahmose I maintained after ending his monotheistic worship by the Hyksos. Plutarch conflated this god with Typhon; despite not owning a barge, he helped fight the serpent Apep nightly. This husband of Nephthys created a leaden casket to drown his brother, whose son castrated this god after this god ripped the brother into fourteen pieces. For 10 points, name this god with the head of an uncertain long-snouted animal, a rival of Osiris and Horus who was source of evil in the storms and deserts of ancient Egypt.

ANSWER: Set [or Seth or Seteh; accept Bebo]

Result: 1456 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 12 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 39115

Question: This figure distributes the incomes of six hundred other beings that he split between the heaven and the netherworld; those beings are called the Igigi. This mythical figure is honored with the creation of the Esagila edifice by the Anunnaki. One of this figure's eponyms is Tutu, representing his purifying role. In one fight, this god uses the four winds to control a net before inflating and firing an arrow, splitting his rival in half. He creates the palace of Esharra above the ocean of fresh water in which his father Enki dwells. This grandson of Anu and hero of the Enuma Elish makes the first human after taking Kingu's Tablets of Destiny. For 10 points, name this chief god who defeats the she-dragon Tiamat and creates the world out of her dead body in Babylonian mythology.

ANSWER: Bel Marduk [or Amar.Utu, or Merodach, or Mardochios; or Tutu until mentioned; prompt "Bel"] [Editors' note: Marduk has fifty official names. If a player says a name that is not listed here protests that their alternate name from among the fifty should be accepted, rule them incorrect and treat the protest as normal.]

Result: 1457 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 13 | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 39112

Question: Three magic words for making one of these objects are extracted from the dead giant Antero Vipunen after Vainamoinen enters his stomach and beats on the walls. Cymodocea emerges from one of these objects after Cybele transforms a set of them into nymphs during Virgil's Aeneid. The Seven Lucky Gods, or Shichi Fukujin of Shinto, own one of these named for "Treasure." The snake Vasuki attached Vishnu's avatar Matsya to one. Norse myth features one owned by Hrym which is made of dead people's nails, known as Naglfar. Another one included a talking branch from Dodona and a rotten board which killed its owner, who went to Colchis with it and used it to bring back his wife Medea. For 10 points, name this mode of transportation whose mythical examples include Jason's Argo.

ANSWER: ships [or boats]

Result: 1458 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 14 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 39076

Question: A discarded oil bottle helps one heroine travel to this figure by fixing rusty hinges on a gate; that journey's purpose was to ask for a needle and thread to repair clothing. Another journey to visit this figure, who is absent in the Book of Revelation, featured white, red, and black horses with riders in the same color going by; those riders are said by this character to represent the day, the sun, and the night to a girl with a magical doll. A badass talking cat helps one girl escape this captor of Vasilissa the Beautiful. This figure, who is said to have one leg made of clay, iron, or most frequently bone, owns a giant, flying mortar and pestle and lives in a hut raised by huge chickens' legs. For 10 points, name this child-eating, demonic old hag from Slavic folklore.

ANSWER: Baba Yaga Bony-Leg [or Baba Yuga or Yaga Baba]

Result: 1459 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 2 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 40183

Question: In this people's myth system, the burning of a rat messenger's tail in a fire explained why rats have no hair on their tails. A villain in this myth system survives a shot to the jaw while eating nance fruit from a tree, then rips off the shooter's arm. This people's creator god wipes out a race of men made of wood. One locale in their mythos features a tree bearing skull-shaped fruit and is surrounded by blood, pus, and scorpions in three riverbeds. That locale in this mythos, which includes the Knife House and Bat House of Camazotz along with a ball court where One-Death and Seven-Death play a sacred game, is the death-land Xibalba [shee-BAL-bah]. For 10 points, name this people who wrote of Xbalanque [shba-lahng-KEI] and Hunahpu, the Hero Twins, in the Popol Vuh and built temples at Cobán and Tikal.

ANSWER: Quiché Mayans [accept Quiché; accept Popol Vuh until "this people" is read; prompt "Guatemala" or "Guatemalans"]

Result: 1460 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 3 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 40172

Question: This settlement's founder was a grandson of Batea, whose husband fled the flooded kingdom of Iasion. In the Metamorphoses, it employs an invincible son of Neptune who was eventually beaten by strangling, named Cygnus. It was home to the wedding of Themiste to Capys, who later founded Capua. In one story, a queen from here barked at her captors so fiercely that the gods turned her into a dog. A princess of this city, Hesione, was saved in exchange for magic horses which were never delivered by its king, Laomedon. This site of the Scaean Gate was founded north of the river Scamander by a grandson of Dardanus and allied with Penthisilea's Amazons during a conflict which ended when Neoptolemus slew its king. For 10 points, name this city whose champion was King Priam's son Hector.

ANSWER: Troy [accept Ilium; accept Ilion]

Result: 1461 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 4 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 40069

Question: One figure of this name died of a lightning strike at the Cepharean Rocks according to Hyginus; in other versions, that figure's drowned corpse was buried on the isle of Myconos after Poseidon's trident split the rock that he was clinging to. That man had previously lost a footrace after stumbling and falling at Athena's intervention. Besides that Locrian son of Oileus who raped Cassandra, another figure of this name fathered Eurysaces and saved the Greek ships using his seven-ply oxhide shield. That man with this name dueled Hector twice, killed sheep in a frenzy after losing out to Odysseus for the slain Achilles' armor, and was the son of Telamon. For 10 points, name these unrelated "Lesser" and "Greater" Greek heroes of the Iliad.

ANSWER: Ajax [accept Ajax the Lesser or Locrian Ajax until "another figure" is read; accept Aias in place of "Ajax" throughout; accept Aiantes]

Result: 1462 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 5 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 40065

Question: Though it's not the tides or cows, an ancient Persian god of this type was named Mah or Mao. An old Hindu god of this type offended Daksha by only paying attention to one of Daksha's thirteen daughters, named Rohini. That same god of this type was also hit by a tusk thrown by Ganesh. Wu Gang endlessly chops a laurel tree attached to this object in Chinese folklore. The Japanese god of this entity emerged from a copper mirror at birth and, instead of Susanowo, kills the food goddess Ukemochi in disgust. This location's inhabitants also include the wife of Houyi, who swallowed one too many immortality pills to get here, and the medicine-pounding Jade Rabbit. For 10 points, name this body home to Chang-e and presided over by Tsukuyomi, an astronomical object.

ANSWER: gods of the Moon or lunar gods/deities

Result: 1463 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 6 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 40024

Question: 2.	Two of these creatures named Seri and Hurri accompanied the ancient Anatolian storm god Teshub and represented day and night. Hyrieus brought out remains from one of these creatures and asked the gods to urinate on them. Hecale housed the hunter of another of them. According to Herodotus, Cambyses II's stabbing of a living, sacred one of these creatures led him to fatally fall from his horse. That one had at least sixty reincarnations with white diamond markings on their foreheads, was buried in an Egyptian sarcophagus at death, and was named Apis. Another of them, Gugalana, was sent from heaven after Ishtar's advances were refused by Gilgamesh. Theseus slew the Marathonian one, which Heracles fought earlier on Crete. For 10 points, name these male animals which include the father of the Minotaur.

ANSWER: bulls [prompt "cattle;" do not accept "cows" at any point]

Result: 1464 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 7 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 40013

Question: In the Mahabharata, a yaksha causes this to happen to the latest incarnation of Shikhandi, who Bhishma refused to fight after recognizing him from a previous life. As told by Ovid, a daughter of Telethusa and Ligdus named Iphis received this as a blessing in Isis's temple before marrying Ianthe; Ovid also describes how Caeneus became an invincible warrior after this occurrence. In addition to taking the form of a horse, one god underwent the generalized form of this process during the building of a wall around Valhalla to distract Hrungnir's horse Svadilfari, allowing for the birth of Sleipnir. Hera made this happen to a Theban after he used his walking-stick to strike at two mating snakes. For 10 points, name this frequent mythical transformation which gave the prophet Tiresias breasts.

ANSWER: biological sex change [accept switch genders even though the editors believe gender to be a social construct; accept change from female to male or change from woman to man until "horse" is read; prompt "becoming a man" until "horse" is read]

Result: 1465 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 8 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 39617

Question: This figure tested his sword by slicing through a river with a strand of wool running along it. This man meets a warrior in the midst of a tower made of shields and swears loyalty to that warrior after she gives him a draught and teaches him runes. When he is convinced by foster father to kill that father's brother at Gnitaheith, he disguises his name in fear of a death-curse as the Noble Hart. This killer of his foster father Regin learns the language of birds and retains only a leaf-shaped spot of vulnerability on his back after bathing in the blood of his draconic victim Fafnir. This wielder of the reforged sword Gram turns invisible or switches places with his blood brother Gunnar in order to woo the shieldmaiden Brynhild. For 10 points, name this hero of the Volsung Saga and son of Sigmund.

ANSWER: Sigurd [or Siegfried, or Sivard]

Result: 1466 | MAGNI | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 39365

Question: This mythical figure has two servants that represent chaff from a mill and manure used to fertilize land. This god is defended by both Byggvir and Tyr when Loki accuses him of coming from incestuous birth and having an incestuous relationship. He kills the frost giant Beli with a ripped-off antler. This figure owns a ship that always has favorable wind and can be folded up for storage when not in use, which is called Skidbladnir. This employer of Skirnir trades golden apples and that sword, which could fight on its own, for his wife Gerd. This member of the Vanir family of gods dies fighting the leader of Muspell's sons, the fire giant Surt, during Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this Norse god of male fertility, the handsome brother of Freya.

ANSWER: Freyr [or Yngwi Freyr; be careful not to accept "Freya" or "Frigg"]

Result: 1467 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: BentleyDavisHausingerByrne | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 39222

Question: According to Nonnus, this figure was the mother, with Poseidon, of a Greek version of the Latin god Faunus. A son of this figure unknowingly killed his own father with a spear tipped with a stingray spine. Jason and Medea seek absolution from this figure for their murder of Apsyrtos, but she refuses them. In a lost epic this figure makes Telemachus immortal and marries him; that epic is named for her son Telegonus. This figure loved a King of Ausonia, but when he wouldn't renounce his love for Canens, she transformed that king, Picus, into a woodpecker. Jealous of the love of the sea-god Glaucus, this figure turned Scylla into a monster. This daughter of Helios and Perse was the sister of Aeetes, and Eurylochus warns another figure of this woman's treachery. That figure is able to overcome this woman with the help of a magic herb granted by Hermes, after which he forces her to restore the men she had turned into pigs. For 10 points, name this mistress of the island Aiaia, a sorceress who takes Odysseus as a lover for a year.

ANSWER: Circe

Result: 1468 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Chicago A + GMU | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 39247

Question: One area in this location features a banner reading "To subtract the nation and leave behind some dregs". This location also contains a room lit by a dish containing a half-stick of butter, the proportions of which are compared to the tiny canoe in Raphael's chromo "Miraculous Draught of the Fishes". One inhabitant of this location goes with another person to repair a "fountain" that lies right outside this location in the Valley of Holiness. A festival that is held at this location sees the main character inform the Department of Morals and Agriculture that a newspaper needs to be published to report the results of the tournament. In the novel in which it appears, the main character is accused of causing an eclipse by an inhabitant of this place named Sagramore, who the protagonist later defeats by using a lasso. The novel's protagonist wakes up under a tree in this location after being hit on the head with a crowbar, whereupon he encounters a knight. For 10 points, identify this location in which Hank Morgan finds himself in a Mark Twain novel.

ANSWER: King Arthur's Court [accept Camelot or King Arthur's Castle]

Result: 1469 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Chicago A + GMU | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 39251

Question: According to Pausanias, the Argives claim that this man was brother to Eubeleus and son of Trochilus. A Scythian king who tried to kill this man was turned into a lynx, and this figure is often depicted riding across the sky in a winged chariot adorned with dragons. In a Homeric Hymn, this character was included with Diocles, Eumolpos, Polyxeinus, and his father in a list of early priests of that hymn's dedicatee. According to Pherecydes this figure was a son of Gaia and Oceanus, but in the more common tradition, he was the son of Cepheus and Metanira, who prevented a certain figure from burning the immortality away from this man's brother Demophon. For 10 points, name this figure who, according to the Eleusinian Mysteries, was tasked by Demeter with teaching mankind agriculture.

ANSWER: Triptolemus

Result: 1470 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Editors 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 39286

Question: One part of this location, mysteriously called "where the flags wave," contains a mystical lizard symbolizing the earth. This location contains a valley where two mountains periodically smash against one another. One visitor to this location was forced to blow through a hole-less conch shell, which that visitor accomplished by using worms to bore through it; thus, the lord of this place lost the greenstone bones he was guarding. An area where arrows fire from every direction, as well as an area where the wind blows as sharp as knives, were two of the nine test areas one must pass through to reach this location[, which is also home to a building inhabited by Camazotz, the lord of bats]. Souls are guided here by the dog-headed Xolotl. For 10 points, name this lowest level of the underworld from Aztec myth.

ANSWER: Mictlan [or the Aztec underworld before mention; prompt on the underworld or hell] (red text is an incorrect clue added by a tired editor that actually applies to Xibalba)

Result: 1471 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Editors 2 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 39271

Question: In one story, this figure lulled a group of ducks to sleep by singing a song that would leave their eyes red if they were opened, after which he killed half of them and roasted them. However, this figure promptly got his foot caught in a broken tree, which allowed some wolves to eat all his ducks. Another story claims that he was born from the cosmic egg as Ksa, or wisdom, but after being outwitted by the demon Gnaski he took on his regular form. His brother, the protector of the Aurora Borealis, is the storm monster Iya. He regularly paints black circles around his eyes and dresses in red. For 10 points, identify this son of Inyan the Rock, a Lakota trickster who takes the form of a spider.

ANSWER: Iktomi [or Ikto; or Ictinike; or Inktomi; or Unktome; or Unktomi]

Result: 1472 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Editors 3 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 39554

Question: Before slaying an opponent, one figure with this name hopped around the enemy's army on one foot with one eye closed to imitate them. A cognate figure with this name is born when his mother steps over a wand to prove she is a virgin, but fails the test and spontaneously gives birth. In that myth system, he can only be killed if a spear hits him while he has one foot on a goat and one foot in a bathtub, in which state he is betrayed by his wife Blodeuedd. This god's mother, Ethlinn, was sealed in a crystal tower to prevent him from being born, but his father Cian still crept in. He is known as "skilled in many arts" and used a sling to defeat his one-eyed grandfather, the Fomorian Balor, at the Battle of Magh Tuireadh. For 10 points, name this Celtic sun god and father of Cuchullain.

ANSWER: Lugh [or Lleu Llaw Gyffes, the Welsh equivalent]

Result: 1473 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Editors 4 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 39729

Question: This figure hooked his son who he fathered on either Teridae or Pieris up with a daughter of Alector. This figure is delayed for some time because he had to bury his helmsman Phrontes, a fate that comically also befalls his steersman Canobus during the eight years this figure spends roaming the Eastern Mediterranean. Earlier, this father of Megapenthes is foiled when he drags an enemy by the helmet, only to have Aphrodite wrap that enemy in a cloud. He dedicates his wife's necklace to Athena Pronoea and is given a spot in Elysium because he had married a daughter of Zeus. He gave up the second prize at the funeral games of Patroclus and in one tradition is sacrificed in Tauris to the goddess Artemis by his niece, Iphigenia. But usually, after the Trojan War, he is said to have returned to ruling Sparta. For 10 points, name this king whose wife, Helen, was abducted by Paris.

ANSWER: Menelaus

Result: 1474 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Editors 5 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 39882

Question: This character is said to have a "notorious" triangular stone heart, which lends its name to a rune but doesn't stop this character from pissing himself on seeing his enemy. This figure challenges his foe to a battle in his home of Grjotunagard after earlier boasting about his plans to steal Valhalla. He used a mare's heart to power his companion, a nine-mile-tall clay man called Mokkurkalfi who is easily defeated by Thjazi. Groa got too distracted by news of Aurvandil to finish removing the pieces of whetstone that a battle with this character left in a certain deity's forehead. Magni is the only one able to lift this figure's leg after his death, thus unpinning his killer. His introduction in the Skaldskaparmal sees him bet Odin that Sleipnir is no faster than his horse Gullfaxi, about which he is wrong. For 10 points, name this overconfident giant whose drunken blundering through Valhalla is halted when Thor smashes his head in.

ANSWER: Hrungnir

Result: 1475 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Editors 6 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 39903

Question: One character who experienced this was a king of Colonae who killed Protesilaus and fathered Tenes with Philonome. As a son of Poseidon, that man was immune to weapons, so Achilles crushed him to death, after which this happened to him. Another character with the same name gave up his immortality in order to do this, so that he might be able to retrieve the body of his friend Phaethon. In an Irish story, Aoife's magic causes this to happen to the Children of Lir. This also happens every other Samhain to Caer Ibormeith. This happened to both a character who killed and cooked her son Itys and her sister, who wove a tapestry depicting her rape and detonguing. For 10 points, identify this transformation undergone by Procne, Philomela, and several people named Cycnus or Cygnus, which generally allows the transformee to fly.

ANSWER: turning into a bird [accept equivalents; accept avification; reverse-prompt on more specific answers like "turning into a swan" or "turning into a swallow" or "turning into a nightingale", though you should accept "turning into a swan" before "Itys"]

Result: 1476 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Editors 7 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 40309

Question: As this figure bends down to take his skates off, he glances into a patch of ice and falls into a trance. The first words of this figure beg another to "cease your lament! Swearing profits no-one." In response to this man's actions, a group of figures repeat the word "Blerwm" eight times. This figure's foster mother had a ring jammed in her finger, proving that it was not her who the lecher Rhun despoiled, but rather someone else. With Dobbin, this figure won a horse race after defeating Maelgwn's men in a contest. He met his foster father and mother after being released from a leather bag and being named for his radiant brow. This figure was born after a plan to infuse the ugly Morfran with skill went awry, leading the servant boy Gwion to be chased and eaten by Ceridwen, who gave birth to this figure. For 10 points, name this mythological figure, the most famous Welsh bard.

ANSWER: Taliesin

Result: 1477 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Editors 8 + NYU | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 40440

Question: In exchange for 40 half-carcasses and 40 skins of water, this character helps Malik Mammad retrieve some apples from the giant Div. This being lived either on the mountain of Cafcuh or in the middle of Vourukhasa on a plant which was guarded by a six-eyed, nine-mouthed donkey and the Kara fish and named Gaokerena. This creature, which has seen the destruction of the world three times over, contributes to the arrow that kills Esfandiyar and saves an albino infant from the slopes of Alborz. A hoopoe leads an expedition to find this creature in an Attar poem, while in its most famous appearance, it helps Zal perform a C-section on Rudaba, thus saving the life of the infant Rostam. For 10 points, identify this large copper-feathered creature which, like the Rukh, is a large bird from Persian mythology.

ANSWER: the Simurgh [or Simorgh; or Zumrud; or Simourv; or Angha]

Result: 1478 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Illinois +Jha + Yale | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 40679

Question: An extremely old member of this group is covered by an anthill and gains a youthful body when his nubile wife Sukanya refuses to be seduced by handsome twins. One of them fathers Shakuntala when the nymph Menaka seduces him at Indra's instigation. One of them offers advice to Prince Rama in a namesake "Yoga", while another is the husband of Maitreyi who debated Gargi at the congress of King Janaka. An individual's gotra codifies descent from the original group of these people, who are sometimes called "the Bears" to reflect their association with the stars of Ursa Major. Visvamitra, Vasishta, Kasyapa, and Gautama are usually named among that first group of seven responsible for writing hymns to the gods. For 10 points, name this group of sages who authored the Vedas.

ANSWER: Rishis [or Brahmarishis or Maharishis]

Result: 1479 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Sethlene Laferbrook + VCU | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 41013

Question: This character shares his name with a king who took Calchas's sister Theonoë as his mistress, but released her when her sister Leucippe and father Thestor turned up at his court. This character's death is similar to that of King Bladud in Geoffrey of Monmouth's History of the Kings of Britain, and resembles a non-fatal calamity that befell Sampati during a competition with his brother (*) Jatayu, the king of the vultures. This figure's mother Naucrate was one of Minos's slaves, and he and his father spent some time locked up in the Labyrinth after his father helped Pasiphaë mate with the Cretan Bull. For 10 points, melting wax spelled doom for what son of the master craftsman Daedalus who died when he flew too close to the sun?

ANSWER: Icarus

Result: 1480 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: UCSD + Chicago B + Ursinus | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 41033

Question: This figure is called an enemy of Kansa and a lookalike of Sankarshana in one of Yudhishthira's hymns. In one myth, this figure is formed in response to the wretchedness of a bunch of gods reduced to begging, after which this figure confronts a buffalo-demon and taunts him to roar with delight. Clay statues of this deity are submerged in rivers on the day of Vijayadashami in Bengal. This slayer of Mahishasura rides the tigress Dawon and carries a lotus flower and ten arms' worth of weapons. Her assistants the Matrikas aid her in a battle in which the many clones of Raktabija cause her to become so desperate that Kali bursts out of her head and slaughters everything. 10 points, name this martial Hindu goddess with a namesake Puja.

ANSWER: Maa Durga [prompt on Devi]

Result: 1481 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: Vinokurov + Michigan | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 41194

Question: One story about a ruler of this location says that upon returning from Troy, he had vowed to sacrifice the first person he saw to Poseidon; that turned out to be his son, and the ruler of this place was exiled for his actions. Another story about this place holds that its throne was usurped by Leucus while the aforementioned king was at Troy. Another king of this city defeated the king of Megara by having the princess Scylla remove a lock of purple hair from Nisos' head; that king was later killed in a bath by the daughters of Cocalus. and Heracles' seventh labor involved retrieving a creature from this location that would later be captured by Theseus at Marathon. This location was home to the Dictaean Cave where Rhea hid Zeus, and it was once guarded by a bronze giant with a single vein, Talos, who was killed with Medea's help. The capital city of this kingdom, once ruled by Idomeneus, featured a structure designed by Daedalus to hold one of Pasiphae's offspring, the Minotaur. For 10 points, identify this island kingdom ruled by Minos from his palace at Knossos.

ANSWER: Crete

Result: 1482 | Minnesota Open | 2011 | Round: WUSTL | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 41210

Question: This man's brother, Lucan, held the title of a "Butler." In Welsh tradition, he has one hand, is extremely handsome, and is the first to strike the giant Ysbaddaden in the romance Culhwch ac Olwen. In Geoffrey of Monmouth's accounts, the act most associated with him is performed by his cousin, Griflet, and he is killed by King Boccus in France after teaming with Kay and his master to fight a giant at Mount Saint Michel. According to Thomas Malory, this man's master once grew extremely angry at him after he relayed a story about seeing nothing but the rippling of water. That occurred after the battle of Camlann, when this man's mortally wounded master gave him a task that eventually results in a giant hand arising from the water to receive an object. For 10 points, name this loyal knight of King Arthur who returned Excalibur to the Lady of the Lake.

ANSWER: Sir Bedivere [accept Sir Bedwyr Bedrydant or Sir Bedoier]

Result: 1483 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 41176

Question: In the Voluspa, the Aesir-Vanir war starts when one of these is thrown over the heads of the Vanir. One of these objects was known to sprout thirty barbs and could only be used by means of one's toes. The owner of that one of these objects gained it after training with Scáthach and later used it to kill his foster brother Ferdiad. Achilles has one of these objects that no one else can wield, with which he healed Telephus. In addition to Cu Culainn's (*) Gáe Bolg, one of these items that never misses when thrown and is later used to fight Fenrir belongs to Odin. For 10 points, name these weapons that include Gungnir and the weapon supposedly owned by Longinus that pierced Jesus' side during the crucifixion.

ANSWER: lance [accept spear]

Result: 1484 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 10 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 41517

Question: A Pegasus-like beast with the wings of one of these creatures can be seen on some early Athenian vases. In Greek myth, Ares turns Alektryon into one of these creatures because he let Helios peep on him and Aphrodite. In Norse myth, although not a falcon or an eagle, one of these birds perches atop the world tree, and another golden one will toll the onset of (*) Ragnarok. Those birds are Vidofnir and Fjalar. In Japanese myth, several of these birds were used to trick Amaterasu into leaving her cave by making her think it had dawned outside. For 10 points, name these barnyard birds, of which Chaucer's Chanticleer is an example, which typically mate with hens.

ANSWER: Roosters [accept cocks; prompt on chickens; do not accept "hens"]

Result: 1485 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 11 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 41538

Question: In the Cypria, this figure is the child of Zeus and Nemesis, and she was conceived after a shape-shifting contest. After the death of one of her husbands, she became the lover of his brother Deiphobus. Earlier, this woman left behind her daughter Hermione to elope. In the Odyssey, her husband tells of how she imitated the voice of the wives of her opponents. In another tradition, she was not killed for her (*) unfaithfulness because she dropped her robes to distract her husband. She was born from an egg because Zeus used the form of a swan to seduce her mother Leda. Her sister was Clytemnestra and her face "launched a thousand ships." For 10 points, name this wife of Menelaus who was taken by Paris in an incident that began the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Helen of Troy

Result: 1486 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 12 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 41561

Question: This figure told the women of one tribe to make their hair resemble beards so that her husband would name them and be obligated to make them victorious. This creator of the Lombards is served by a mysterious virgin who carries an ashen box containing unknown contents. The constellation Orion's Belt was regarded as this goddess' distaff. She is accompanied by the medicine goddess Eir. The (*) only known parent of this goddess is the esoteric deity Fjorgyn. This goddess's abode is called Fensalir. Her only biological son was killed by her stepson Hodr as a result of Loki's scheming. For 10 points, name this mother goddess of Norse mythology, the mother of Baldr and wife of Odin.

ANSWER: Frigga [accept Frigg]

Result: 1487 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 2 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 41330

Question: One of this figure's companions is a dog who was once cut in half and had his back legs sewed on upside-down. This man and his companions let their beards grow endlessly so that they could use them to stay warm during the "Year of the Two Winters." The first stories about this man were published by James MacGillivray, but he became popular through the advertisements of W.B. Laughead. This man was delivered to his parents by a relay team of (*) five storks. He found his most famous companion bleating in a giant snowdrift during the Year of the Blue Snow. For 10 points, name this companion of Babe the Blue Ox, a giant lumberjack from American folklore.

ANSWER: Paul Bunyan

Result: 1488 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 3 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 41346

Question: This figure's son, the husband of Cigfa, followed a white boar and found himself trapped by a golden bowl. This figure was transformed into an ass until her husband captured a mouse that was actually her enchanter's pregnant wife. The creation of a game called "badger-in-the-bag" helped this woman escape marriage to Gwawl. This woman's first husband's fastest horsemen could not keep up with her (*) white horse, and the son she bore to that husband was raised by Teyrnon after he disappeared from the care of 6 handmaidens. This woman was forced to act as a horse in penance after being framed for the murder and cannibalism of that son. For 10 points, name this wife of Pwyll and mother of Pryderi.

ANSWER: Rhiannon

Result: 1489 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 4 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 41372

Question: This god's son Jayanta was kidnapped by his consort Sachi's father, Puloma, while fighting Ravana in his city Amravati. Diti prayed for a son who would kill this Deva, prompting him to enter her womb through her nostril and cut her fetus into 49 pieces. Those pieces became the companions of Vayu, the Maruts. Because he was the first in his tradition's history to sleep with another man's wife, this Deva was cursed to be adorned with a thousand (*) phalluses. This figure transformed into a water snake and hid in the stem of a lotus after slaying the dragon Vritra. For 10 points, name this vajra-wielding king of the Devas, the father of Arjuna and the Vedic god of lightning.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 1490 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 5 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 41396

Question: Ovid claims that this action befell the eldest daughter of Cecrops when she protected her younger sister Herse. Another person to experience this was bribed with a cow after he saw Hermes steal Apollo's cattle. In addition to Aglauros and Battos, another person to experience this fate was a son of Merops who was told by Tantalus to steal a golden dog from Zeus; that man was Pandareus. Book 13 of the Odyssey states that a Phaeacian ship did this because of the anger of Poseidon. This fate befell a woman who retreated to Mount Sipylus and literally (*) cried a river after her fourteen children were murdered by Artemis and Apollo. Polydectes joined Niobe in meeting this fate after Perseus returned from his quest. For 10 points, name this transformation that happened to those who looked directly at the Gorgon Medusa

ANSWER: turn to stone [accept equivalents]

Result: 1491 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 6 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 41444

Question: This god saved the fisherman Adapa, whom another deity wanted to give the food of death for having magically stopped the wind. In one story, this deity's semen was taken out of his lover and planted in the ground, where it produced fruit that this god ate. This deity's lust caused him to rape his daughter Ninsar, then their daughter Ninkurra, then their daughter Uttu, infuriating his wife (*) Ninhursag. To prevent Apsu from annihilating the world, he put him into a deep sleep under the earth, thus creating irrigation. For 10 points, name this Babylonian god of civilization, who shared power with Enlil and Anu

ANSWER: Enki [or Ea]

Result: 1492 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 7 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 41454

Question: After defeating the demon Hiranyaksha, one god assumed the form of this animal to rescue Bhumidevi from the bottom of the ocean. Plexippus and Toxeus were two brothers of Althaea who were killed after they argued over the pelt of one of these creatures. Ottar was changed into one of these creatures by his lover Freya. The form of this animal was assumed by Vishnu's third avatar, Varaha. A (*) golden one of these animals, Gullinbursti, was owned by Freyr, and King Eurystheus hid in a jar when Heracles brought back one of these animals that he had to capture for his fourth labor. For 10 points, name this type of animal that was hunted by Meleager, Atalanta, and others in the area around Calydon.

ANSWER: wild boar [prompt on pig or wild hog; prompt on Vishnu before "animal" is read]

Result: 1493 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 8 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 41477

Question: This man performed the winding "Crane dance" around the altar of Aphrodite in Delos. This character is repeatedly called "treacherous" in the 64th poem of Catullus. After being sent on a quest by his stepmother, this man was hosted by the old woman Hecale. This man also fought Creon over the burial of the Seven Against Thebes. This man sheltered a friend who had murdered his own family because that friend, Heracles, had rescued this man from the (*) underworld. This man killed a figure who made passersby fit into a bed by any means necessary, the bandit Procrustes, while journeying to meet his father Aegeus. This husband of Hippolyta and Phaedra was sent to an island on which Ariadne helped him escape a labyrinth. For 10 points, name this slayer of the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 1494 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 41495

Question: In one story, this deity disguised himself and had a small manikin magically dance on his hand. A crowd of people then stoned him to death, only to find out that his dead body gave off a terrible smell and that he was too heavy to move. In a festival honoring this god, jewels and four women were given to a young prisoner before he was sacrificed. This deity once stole away a flower goddess from a rain god. This deity also sent his (*) brother into exile by getting him drunk. He once destroyed the world in the form of a jaguar, while earlier this deity helped create the Earth out of the body of the ocean monster Cipactli, which he lured in by using his foot as bait. He later replaced that body part with an obsidian mirror. For 10 points, name this Aztec deity of the night who often fought against his brother Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca

Result: 1495 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 41636

Question: In one account, this land was ruled by the Toltecs and then by the Turanians. The former used aircraft powered by vril, while the latter practiced black magic and created various chimeras to act as servants and soldiers. According to that tradition, Morya was made an emperor of this land and it was destroyed after a series of earthquakes nine thousand years ago. In a different account, this land was divided into sixty thousand lots, each of which had to nominate a leader for military duties, and was ruled over by (*) ten oath-bound kings. That story tells of how Poseidon fell in love with Cleito and how it is comprised of three circles built of white, black, and red stone adorned with the metals brass, tin, and orichalcum. In Theosophy, the fourth root race lived here, while Plato described this place in his Critias and Timaeus. For 10 points, name this mythical land found beneath the sea.

ANSWER: Atlantis

Result: 1496 | Missiles of October | 2011 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 41638

Question: After placing one child with a herd of lambs, this figure told her husband she had given birth to a horse. Some of the dactyls she created by planting her fingers in the earth were Titias and Kyllenos. This figure was worshipped with tambourines and drums both on her own and when syncretized with Cybele. Zeus sent this figure to convince Demeter to return to Olympus. She also set the (*) Curetes around a cave where she had hidden her son. The cult of this figure was based in Crete, where she sent a child to be raised after she gave her husband a stone to be swallowed, saving her sixth child and allowing him to overthrow her husband Cronus. For 10 points, name this Titan, the mother of the Olympians.

ANSWER: Rhea [accept Cybele until mentioned]

Result: 1497 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 1 - finalized (updated).doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 4532

Question: In the Fjollvinnsmal, this deity was said to have plucked and engraved with runes the wand Laevateinn. He is the son of Farbauti and brother of Byleistr and Helblindi, and one of his sons is turned into a wolf who promptly rips out the throat of his other son, whose entrails are used to bind him. He once borrowed a cloak to rescue a goddess from Thrymheim, after having earlier been tricked by Thiazi into allowing that goddess, Idunn, to be captured. This god once lost an eating contest to a similarly-named personification of fire while accompanying Thor to the court of Utgard-Loki, and he is also the mother of Sleipnir. His wife Sigyn catches the poison that eternally falls on him, a punishment he earned in part for tricking Hodr into killing his brother. For 10 points, identify this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki Laufeyarson [accept Loge]

Result: 1498 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 10 - finalized.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 4548

Question: In one myth, this god ordered messengers to gather red ochre from the isle of Elephantine. His retinue often included the goddess of perception, Sia, and either he or Thoth often hung out with the deification of Atum's first word, Hu. This owner of Mesektet and Mandjet was associated with Mnevis, a bull, while his soul was represented by a Bennu bird. He used beer mixed with pomegranate juice to calm Sekhmet, and he is genrally considered the father of Shu and Tefnut. Either Bast or Set helped ward off the attacks of the serpent Apep, who attacked this god during his nightly trip through Duat. For 10 points, identify this deity who was often syncretized with figures like Atum and Amun, the Egyptian god of the sun.

ANSWER: Ra [Accept Re or Amun-Ra or Atum-Ra; prompt on Atum due to lots of confusion]

Result: 1499 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 12 - finalized (updated).doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 4579

Question: This figure's eventual killer is asked to pour a drink for an unwelcome visitor in the Lokasenna. This figure was taken to a heather-covered island on a pitch-black lake, where he was shown an item retrieved from Svartalfheim by Skirnir. He necessitated the use of the stones Thviti and Gjoll, and the saliva flowing from his mouth formed a river named "hope," or Van. His children are responsible for pursuing Mani and Soll, and he himself broke both Laeding and Dromi. He will eventually be defeated in part by a shoe made from leather scraps, with which Vidarr will step on his jaw before tearing him in half. He bit off the right hand of Tyr after being bound by the magical fetter Gleipnir. For 10 points, identify this father of Hati and Skoll, a giant wolf who will eat Odin at Ragnarok.

ANSWER: Fenrir [accept Fenrisulfr or the Fenris wolf]

Result: 1500 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 2 - finalized.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 4596

Question: Every night this god roamed the earth in the form of a skeleton, daring those he met to grab his heart from his chest and promising riches and power. He was generally depicted with a black and yellow stripe across his face, and twenty gold bells on his ankles, and he carried four arrows. In one story, this god got his brother drunk and induced him to seduce his sister, leading to that brother's exile, while in another story he abducted the flower goddess Xochiquetzal from her original husband, Tlaloc. This deity lost his foot when he used it as bait for the crocodile Cipactli during the creation of the world, after which he replaced it with either a snake or a smoking obsidian mirror. For 10 points, identify this Aztec god, known for his jaguar form and for his rivalry with Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca

Result: 1501 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 3 - finalized.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 4600

Question: This figure's charioteer works with the demigoddess Li Ban to cure the wasting sickness preventing this figure from defending the kingdom of Fand. In one tale, he goes to the pool of Linn Liaith, where he finds his horses Liath Macha and Dub Sainglend. He accidentally kills his son Connla, who he had fathered on Aife during his time training under Scathach. He engages in a grueling three-day duel against his blood brother Ferdiad during an invasion of his homeland led by Ailill and Medb. This husband of Emer uses his spear, the Gae Bulg, to defend Ulster during the Cattle Raid of Cooley. For 10 points, identify this son of the god Lugh, an Irish hero who was born Setanta but adopted a new name after replacing the hound of Culann.

ANSWER: Cu Chulainn [accept Setanta]

Result: 1502 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 4 - finalized.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 4627

Question: This man's son Acamas hid in the Trojan Horse, while information provided to this man by the herald Leos allowed him to foil an ambush at Gargettus set up by the Pallantides. He defeated Cercyon in a wrestling match after earlier hunting down a creature bred by Phaea known as the Crommyonian sow. The Dioscuri rescued Helen from Aethra after this man kidnapped her because of his promise to wed a daughter of Zeus. While he was traveling to Athens, he killed a man who kicked people into the sea named Sciron and one who stretched or chopped visitors fit his bed, Procrustes. He married Phaedra after abandoning his first wife Ariadne on Naxos and after being sent as a tribute to Crete, he slew a monstrous child of Pasiphae that wandered the Labyrinth. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who killed the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 1503 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 6 - finalized.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 4665

Question: A triad of deities in this myth system includes the moon goddess Awilix and is sometimes known syncretically by the name of the fire god Tohil. This mythos represents thunder as a quartet of drunken, lecherous old men, some of whom carry a turtle and a conch shell. Another of this mythology's gods was a psychopomp who wore a noose around her neck and accompanied suicides to the underworld. In addition to the four Bacabs and Ixtab, this myth system includes the bat god Camazotz and an earthquake deity named Zipacna, the son of Seven Macaw. Its God K is the personification of the axe owned by the rain god Chaac, while most famous stories center on the exploits of the Hero Twins and their conquest of the lords of Xibalba. For 10 points, identify this Mesoamerican myth system whose stories are recorded in the Popol Vuh.

ANSWER: Mayan mythology

Result: 1504 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 7 - finalized.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 4672

Question: In The Secret of Kells, Aisling is one of these creatures who helps Brendan enter the cave of Crom Cruach. When Sarah first meets Hoggle in Labyrinth, he is killing these creatures. Cottingley natives Elsie Wright and Frances Griffiths created photographs ostensibly proving their existence. Two of these figures befriend a Skull Kid in Termina Field at the beginning of Majora's Mask, while

ANSWER: fairies [be generous in accepting equivalents; take things like "sprites" or "pixies"; accept "fairy godmothers" out of generosity as well]

Result: 1505 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 7 - finalized.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 4683

Question: The loa Damballa takes the form of this creature, while the bogatyrs Alyosha Popovich and Dobrynya Nikitich kill Zmey Gorynych and his son Tugarin, two other examples of these creatures. One of these creatures made the Yamuna River unsafe for life until Krishna danced on his head, while another of them hung out on an island with Aigle and Erytheia and was named Ladon. Another of these creatures was once disguised as a cat by a giant and, in another story, was attracted by an ox-head and nearly killed, but was released by Hymir. In Hindu mythology, Garuda served as their eternal foe, and they are known as nagas, while in Norse mythology, Midgard in encircled by one named Jormungandr. For 10 points, identify this type of creature that, in Christian mythology, convinced Eve to eat an apple.

ANSWER: serpents [accept snakes or dragons or stuff like that; prompt on nagas until it's read]

Result: 1506 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 8 - finalized.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 4699

Question: This deity was once assisted by the winds in breaking the fighting spirit of the river Xanthus, or Scamander, thus saving the life of Achilles. His children include a man-eating monster who was killed by Heracles after stealing some of Geryon's cattle from him. This father of Cacus and the Cabeiri gave his apprentice Cedalion to the blind Orion as a guide. This god's consorts include the youngest of the Graces, Aglaia, whose mother Eurynome had cared for him after his ejection by Hera from Mount Olympus. His attempted rape of Athena led to the birth of Erichthonius, while Helios discovered that this god's first wife was having an affair with Ares. For 10 points, identify this husband of Aphrodite, a crippled smith god from Greek mythology.

ANSWER: Hephaestus [accept Vulcan until "Greek" is read, especially since Cacus is a Roman legend]

Result: 1507 | MUT | 2011 | Round: Packet 9 - finalized.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 4720

Question: One of these beings, Hylonome, committed suicide on the death of her husband Cyllarus, another one of them. Another of them died after impaling himself on an ash tree and shared his name with the fisherman that saved Danae. Another of them tried to interrupt Azan's wedding to Hippolyte or his demand that Dexamenus give him the hand of his daughter Mnesimache. In addition to the aforementioned Dictys and Eurytion, their numbers included a character whose poisoned blood was used to coat a shirt given to Heracles and who attempted to rape Deianeira. The most civilized of them tutored various heroes and traded his immortality for Prometheus's freedom, though they're most famous for getting drunk at Pirithous's wedding, leading to a war with the Lapiths. For 10 points, identify these creatures exemplified by Nessus and Chiron, who were half-human and half-horse.

ANSWER: centaurs [accept kentauroi or kentaurides]

Result: 1508 | MUT | 2011 | Round: zFinals 2 - finalized (updated).doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 4750

Question: One of this man's sons killed an Elean named Iphitus, after which he fled to Tiryns and became Eurystheus's herald. Another of his sons won the hand of Megareus's daughter Euaechme by killing the Cythaeronian lion. This father of Copreus and Alcathous had an affair with the nymph Axioche which resulted in an illegitimate son named Chrysippus, who was eventually killed out of jealousy by this man's twin sons Thyestes and Atreus. He once convinced a son of Hermes named Myrtilus to help sabotage the chariot of Oenomaus, allowing him to win the hand of Hippodamia. This man acquired an ivory shoulder after Demeter absentmindedly ate his original one. For 10 points, identify this king of Pisa, who as a boy was cooked and served to the gods by his father Tantalus.

ANSWER: Pelops

Result: 1509 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 01.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 4782

Question: In one story, this woman is killed by Artemis after giving birth to the twins Oenopion and Staphylus. This woman is also said to have died in a fight against the Argives, and in another story, this woman's apotheosis took place at Drios and the crown given to this woman at her wedding became the constellation Corona. This sister of Phaedra became the immortal wife of Dionysus. This woman used a gift from Hephaestus, a ball of string, in order to help her ultimately ungrateful lover escape from a labyrinth. For 10 points, name this woman abandoned on Naxos by Theseus.

ANSWER: Ariadne

Result: 1510 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 04.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 4849

Question: One of these creatures named Hylonome committed suicide when her husband Cyllarus was killed in a battle. Along with fairies, this creatures were said to inhabit the Foloi Oak Forest. A pair of these figures named Hylaeus and Rhaecus attempted to rape Atalanta but were killed by Meleager. A group of these creatures beat Caeneus into the ground using stones, and a group of them were killed by a certain hero after one of them named Pholus offered wine. At the wedding of Pelops and Hippodamia, these creatures fought against their rivals, the Lapiths. These creatures were the product of the union of Ixion and Nephele. Deianeira took a shirt and dipped it into the blood of one of these creatures named Nessus, which caused Heracles great agony when he wore it. For 10 points, name these wise creatures from Greek Mythology which were half-human half-horse.

ANSWER: Centaurs

Result: 1511 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 05.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 4868

Question: This man was once forced to spend a night with Echidna in order to retrieve his horses. In another story, he was robbed and mocked by the monkey-like Cercopes. In a wrestling match, he broke off the horn of the river-god Achelous. He rescued princess Hesione from a sea-monster, and along with Telamon, he organized an expedition to sack Troy. During one feat, he lost a toe to a gigantic crab, but triumphed with the help of his nephew Iolaus. This hero used noise makers to slay the Stymphalian Birds, clubbed the Nemean lion, and killed the Hydra. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who completed twelve labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 1512 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 06.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 4881

Question: The original owners of the pots Othrerir, Bothn, and Son were members of this race named Fjalar and Galar, who were killed by Sutungr after killing the god Kvasir. Loki once turned into a fly and bit one of these creatures named Eitri, in an attempt to prevent one of these creatures named Brokkr from winning a bet. One of these creatures named Alvis attempts to marry the daughter of Thor, but is asked questions until the sun rises and turns him into stone. The sons of Ivaldi are members of this race who built the ship of Freyr and the spear of Odin. This race may be the same as the svartalfen, or black elves. For 10 points, name this race from Norse mythology, notable for being short.

ANSWER: dwarves [accept: dvergr; svartalfen; black elves]

Result: 1513 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 07.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 4905

Question: In a Lithuanian story, the death of Zilvinas causes Egle to turn herself into one of these entities. In the Popul Vuh, the head of Hunahpu brings one of them back to life. In Greek mythology, Melampus heals the prince of Pylos by removing a knife from one of them. A princess of Cyprus is transformed into one of these after seducing her father Cinyras, in which form she gives birth to Adonis. After receiving generous hospitality, Zeus and Hermes transform Baucis and Philemon into these entities. In Greek mythology they are inhabited by Dryads. Daphne became one of these to escape Apollo. For 10 points, the Norse Yggdrasil is an example of what kind of large mythological plant?

ANSWER: trees

Result: 1514 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 08.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 4929

Question: On a holiday sacred to this deity, bilwa leaves are placed atop a symbol of him, which is bathed in yogurt and rose water every three hours. In one story, this god appeared as a massive pillar of fire and challenged two other deities to find its endpoints. This god is often depicted crushing the evil dwarf Apasmara. This god incinerates the god of love after being woken up by Kama. This god is often depicted in the form of Nataraja, the cosmic dancer. Worship of this god can involve "linga", or sacred stones. This god rides the bull Nandi and uses a trident as a weapon. His wives include Parvati and Kali. For 10 points, name this Hindu god called "the destroyer".

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 1515 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 09.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 4960

Question: This woman is often depicted with butterfly wings. An oracle told this woman's parents to abandon her on a rock to be married to a snakelike monster, but she was then rescued by Zephyr. This woman then lived in a house with invisible servants, where she accidentally spilled oil on her sleeping husband after her envious sisters urged her to look at him. The story of this woman first appeared in Apuleius' The Golden Ass. This woman separated grains with the help of some ants and also retrieved golden wool stuck to branches. After appeasing Venus, this woman became the goddess of the soul. For 10 points, name this wife of Cupid.

ANSWER: Psyche

Result: 1516 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 10.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 4974

Question: One common kenning for these objects was "Ullr's ship." In Arthurian mythology, the Lady of the Lake gives one of these to Lancelot that cures its owner of exhaustion and gives him the strength of three men. King Arthur owned one named Pridwen, and Sir Galahad's was partially made from the blood of Joseph of Arimathea. In Rome, one of these objects called the Ancile was watched by the twelve leaping Salii priests. Another of these objects depicts various events in the history of Rome around the Battle of Actium at its center, as related in a long ecphrasis; that example was forged by Vulcan for Aeneas. For 10 points, the aegis was an example of what defensive weapon?

ANSWER: shields

Result: 1517 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 11.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 5002

Question: This woman's father was himself the son of Procas. She was punished by her uncle by being buried alive but her children were saved by the river god. This woman was the daughter of King Numitor of Alba; Numitor was later overthrown by his brother Amulius who forced this woman to become a vestal virgin. Despite that, she was impregnated by Mars and subsequently had her children raised by Acca Larentia and the shepherd god Faustulus. This occurred after her children were given away by her husband Tiberinus to be suckled by Lupa, a she-wolf. For 10 points, name this mythical mother of Romulus and Remus.

ANSWER: Rhea Silvia

Result: 1518 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 13.pdf | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 5046

Question: One of this deity's exploits was witnessed by Battus, a shepherd this deity turned into stone. Statues of this deity often showed a head on top of a uniform stone pillar, where genitalia were attached at an appropriate position; Alcibiades was accused of desecrating those statues. This deity's son with Aphrodite was so beloved by the nymph Salmacis that the gods made them one being, male and female. Offspring of this deity include a satyr conceived with the nymph Dryope named Pan. This deity once stole the cattle of Apollo. For 10 points, name the messenger of the Greek gods.

ANSWER: Hermes [or Mercury]

Result: 1519 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 14.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 5077

Question: This figure is the son of the goddess Neith, who gave birth to this figure by spitting, and this figure's name is sometimes wrongly translated as "he who was spat out". This figure's head was made of flint. At certain times, priests in the Temple of Karnak made wax effigies of this figure, and then mutilated them while chanting this figure's secret name in an effort to weaken him. In one famous depiction of this figure, he is being killed with a spear, but he is usually clawed to death when his rival transforms into a cat. This figure lived in the Duat, or underworld, where he was resurrected every night and attempted to destroy a boat carrying the sun before being killed by Seth or Ra. For 10 points, name this god of evil in Egyptian mythology, depicted as a giant snake.

ANSWER: Apophis [or Apep; or Apepi]

Result: 1520 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 15.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 5089

Question: This figure forced another deity to retrieve a giant "turnip head" arrow and spend two nights in rooms full of centipedes and snakes before he could marry his daughter. This figure gave birth to five children by biting his sibling's necklace. After being expelled from heaven, this figure used giant tubs of wine to make a dragon drunk and rescue Kushinada-hime. This deity threw a flayed horse into his sister's room. He retrieved the Kusanagi blade after killing Yamata-no-Orochi. For 10 points, name this brother of Amaterasu, the Shinto god of storms.

ANSWER: Susano'o

Result: 1521 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 16.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 5116

Question: When a sacrifice was made to this god, it was customary for the person making the sacrifice to turn his face away. This god almost seduced the nymph Minthe, but was foiled when his wife turned her into a mint plant. The Romans called this deity "Dis Pater" and referred to his realm as "Orcus." This god kept a prisoner named Pirithous, who was stuck in a chair from which he could not get up. This owner of a cap of invisibility kidnapped Persephone from her mother, Demeter. For 10 points, name this Greek god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Hades [or Pluto; or Dis Pater or Orcus before they are read]

Result: 1522 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 17.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 5146

Question: This man won a duel against Duke Orilus, who was angry at him because he had taken a token from Jeschute. This man married the niece of his tutor Gornemant, Blanchefleur. The first time this man saw knights he believed they were angels because he had been raised in the forest. This man failed to ask a question about a procession that would have healed the wounded Fisher King. This man is the subject of an epic by Wolfram von Eschenbach. For 10 points, name this Arthurian knight who, along with Sir Galahad, obtained the Holy Grail.

ANSWER: Sir Percival [or Parzival]

Result: 1523 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 18.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 5159

Question: This figure gathered a group of fifteen physicians for his mortally wounded friend to no effect, though a sixteenth got that friend briefly into fighting form after three days in a bath. This figure's son had three curses put on him: not being able to turn back, refuse a fight, or tell his name, which resulted in him killing his son. This man killed his friend Ferdiad and yielded to his foster-father Fergus in one battle. This hero of the Tain entered a berserker rage to fight off the forces of Queen Medb. For 10 points, name this hero who wielded the spear Gae Bulga during the Cattle Raid of Cooley in the Ulster Cycle.

ANSWER: Cuchulainn [or Setanta]

Result: 1524 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 19.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 5183

Question: The introduction to this work summarizes the historical lead-up to the foundation of Britain, starting with the sack of Troy. The protagonist of this work rides his horse Gringolet to a castle on Christmas Day, where he refuses a golden ring before receiving a silk girdle from a woman. He keeps this gift secret from the lord of the castle, Bercilak da Hautdesert, causing the protagonist to bleed heavily from an axe blow to his neck later in this work. That strike is delivered after the protagonist beheads a man disguised by Morgan le Fay on Christmas Eve. For 10 points, name this Middle English work of literature attributed to the Pearl Poet that focuses on a knight of King Arthur's court.

ANSWER: Sir Gawain and the Green Knight

Result: 1525 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 19.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 5189

Question: These figures were the handmaidens to the young Persephone before she was abducted by Hades. These beings almost caused the death of Butes before he was saved by Aphrodite. They are sometimes considered the daughters of Achelous, and their names are given as Peisinoe, Aglaope, and Thelxiepeia. Orpheus' lyre saved the Argonauts from them. In the Odyssey, they are encountered shortly before Scylla and Charybdis, and they inspire Odysseus to tie himself to the mast. For 10 points, name these half-bird women whose beautiful singing would lure sailors to their deaths.

ANSWER: Sirens [or Seirenes]

Result: 1526 | NASAT | 2011 | Round: 20.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 5198

Question: One of these animals named Maera brought Erigone to the body of her father, Icarius. Another of these animals was depicted next to the throne of Serapis, the official god of Ptolemaic Egypt. The female doctor Procris of Athens was given one of these animals as a gift after she cured King Minos. One of these animals named Orthrus had two heads and was killed by Hercules during the labor involving the cattle of Geryon. One of these animals, Laelaps, was turned to stone by Zeus after he created a paradox by chasing an uncatchable fox. Odysseus owned another of these animals named Argos. For 10 points, name this animal, examples of which include Cerberus.

ANSWER: dogs

Result: 1527 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 1 - Prelims 1.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 5233

Question: Marpessa chose the mortal Idas over this god, who avenged the death of his child by Coronis. He was forced to serve King Admetus as a slave for killing three Cyclopes. Another of this god's lovers was killed by the jealous Zephyr with a stray discus. This god flayed the satyr (*) Marsyas after a music contest, cursed Cassandra to never be believed, and killed the Python to claim Delphi. This god fiercely defended the honor of his mother Leto with help from his twin sister Artemis. For 10 points, name this Greco-Roman god of prophecy, music, and light.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 1528 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 10 - Playoffs 5.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 5251

Question: This figure turned Chelone into a tortoise after refusing to attend his wedding. This god's domain includes xenia, or hospitality to guests, and King Salmoneus once impersonated him. He was fed human flesh by an Arcadian tyrant named Lycaon, who he turned into a wolf. This god killed the dragon-woman Kampe before freeing (*) Briareos and the other two Hekatonchires, a set of hundred-handed giants. This deity was suckled by Amalthea, a goat on Mount Ida, after his mother replaced him with a stone eaten by his father Cronos. For 10 points, name this abductor of Europa, husband of Hera, and lord of Olympus.

ANSWER: Zeus [or Jupiter; accept Hera or Juno until "xenia" is read]

Result: 1529 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 11 - Superplayoffs 1.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 5276

Question: Ayida Weddo is one of these married to the sky loa Damballa, who is also usually depicted as one. The Chinese goddess Nu Gua has the body of one. Indian ones include one bound to Mount Mandar during the churning of the milk ocean, exhaling blue poison as a result. That jeweled one, King Vasuki, led a group of them opposed to Garuda, while another of these is (*) Sesha. Eurydice was killed by a bite from one of these creatures, and Kusanagi came from the body of one after Susanowo slew it and its eight heads. Exemplified by the nagas, for 10 points, name these creatures that include Jormungandr, the "Midgard" one, and that make up the strands of Medusa's hair.

ANSWER: snakes [or serpents; prompt on nagas; do not prompt on "dragons"]

Result: 1530 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 12 - Superplayoffs 2.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 5290

Question: This deity proved his kingship by making a garment representing the heavens disappear and reappear at a feast held by Anshar. This four-eared, four-eyed figure created the mansion E-Sara and navigates with the aid of a bright star called Nibiru. This figure also tamed a four-legged creature called the sirrush or mushussu and won one fight by silencing the (*) four directional winds, then commanding a wind to move his magic net. According to the Enuma Elish, this father of Nabu created the zodiac and took Kingu's prize possession, the Tablets of Destiny. For 10 points name this slayer of Tiamat, the chief god of the Babylonian pantheon.

ANSWER: Bel Marduk

Result: 1531 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 14 - Superplayoffs 4.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 5346

Question: During a storm, this man accidentally killed the hospitable king of the Doliones, Cyzicus. He sired twins before abandoning the malodorous isle of Lemnos and its queen, Hypsipyle. This son of Alcimede yoked two bronze-hoofed, fire-breathing bulls and carried a (*) goddess disguised as an old woman across a river. He was sent by his uncle, king Pelias of Iolcus, to deal with Aeetes after arriving home wearing only one sandal. That journey took him through the Symplegades to Colchis and back through the Hellespont. For 10 points, name this husband of Medea, a Greek hero who sailed in search of the Golden Fleece with the Argonauts.

ANSWER: Jason [or Iason]

Result: 1532 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 15 - Superplayoffs 5.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 5361

Question: In one work, this figure uses a cloak of invisibility before competing to throw a javelin, hurl a boulder twelve fathoms, and carry a king while leaping over that boulder. In that work, Hagen and Gunther go hunting with this man and stab a leaf-shaped weak spot on his back to kill him. He also learned the language of (*) birds, withdrew a sword that Odin stuck in a tree, and bathed in dragon's blood after using that sword, called Gram or Balmung, to slay Fafnir. In the Volsunga Saga, he enters a ring of fire to rescue Brynhild. For 10 points, name this Germanic hero of the Nibelungenlied, the son of Sieglinde and Siegmund.

ANSWER: Sigurd Sigmundson [or Siegfried; or Sigurthr; or Sifrit; prompt on Sivard]

Result: 1533 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 17 - TB 1.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 5410

Question: In one story, this man judged Kale the most beautiful of the three Graces and Aphrodite. This figure inspired a man named Menoeceus to try and save his home city by jumping from its rampart. This son of Chariclo died when he drank from the spring of Tilphussa, and sired a daughter named Manto. He received one punishment for striking at a pair of (*) mating snakes, and another either for witnessing Athena's bath or for siding with Zeus in a debate with Hera about sex. For 10 points, name this man who spent seven years as a woman and whose ghost appears in the Odyssey's underworld, a blind Greek prophet.

ANSWER: Tiresias

Result: 1534 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 18 - TB 2.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 5431

Question: This man proved his lineage by jumping down into the sea and retrieving a bauble with some dolphins' help. He fathered Melanippus by raping Perigune after killing her father. This man was treacherously thrown off of a cliff by King Lycomedes of Skyros. He enraged the Dioscuri when he and his friend (*) Pirithous decided to abduct Helen and Persephone. He slew villains like the pine-bender Sinis and the bandit Sciron, in addition to bed-owner Procrustes. This man's father, Aegeus, jumped into the sea after seeing the black sails on this man's ships. For 10 points, name this Athenian hero who took Ariadne's golden thread and killed the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 1535 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 19 - TB 3.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 5455

Question: In the Mahabharata, the Vedic god of this type fathers the only son of Kunti not to fight alongside the Pandavas. That god of this type fathered Karna and the Ashvin twins. Another god of this type turned his weeping daughters by Clymene into amber-dripping poplar trees and suffered over the burial Leucothoe alive. The Chinese believed that (*) nine birds in this role were shot by Hou Yi. Ninigi received beads, a mirror, and a sword as imperial regalia from the Japanese one, and a Greek one killed Python, owned the Delphic oracle, and fathered Phaethon. For 10 points, name this role filled by Surya, five successive Aztec gods, Amaterasu, and Helios.

ANSWER: sun gods [accept solar deities]

Result: 1536 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 2 - Prelims 2.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 5472

Question: This deity rescued Aurvandil, or Earendil, from the frozen waste and made a star out of his toe; by reporting this, he disrupted the concentration of Aurvandil's wife, the witch Groa, in the middle of her incantations. This deity has a whetstone lodged in his head from his duel against the Mist Calf and the giant Hrungnir. This god kept the dwarf (*) Alvis awake until the sun turned him to stone. He took Thialfi as his servant after Thialfi ate one of the marrows of the goats that drive his chariot. This husband of Sif will kill and be killed by the World Serpent at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this wielder of Mjollnir, the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [or Donar]

Result: 1537 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 20 - TB 4.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 5495

Question: This figure once slept with all fifty of the daughters of King Thespius on consecutive nights. Falsely accused of stealing from the flock of Eurytus, this man threw Iphitus off of a cliff. This twin brother of Iphicles left the crew of the Argo to search for his companion Hylas, who was abducted by a nymph. This man married (*) Hebe and gave his arrows to Philoctetes after dying of poison left by the centaur Nessus for Deianeira. After killing Megara and their children, this man performed such labors as killing the Nemean Lion and cleaning the Augean Stables. For 10 points, name this Greco-Roman hero known for his great strength.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 1538 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 22 - Finals 1.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 5534

Question: This figure was born from the poison that dripped from eleven rivers. A son and a daughter were born from the sweat out of this figure's armpits. A huge river of blood drowned much of creation after this figure's death, which was partly accomplished by (*) Vili and Ve. This grandfather of Bergelmir was created alongside a cow named Audhumla. He was eventually killed by the sons of Bor, including Odin. For 10 points, name this primordial ice giant from Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Ymir

Result: 1539 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 23 - Finals 2.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 5552

Question: This deity once broke a tooth off of his comb to use it as a torch. At their first courting, this god's wife spoke first after they had gone around the Heavenly Pillar, as a result of which this god fathered the Leech Child. After being told that one thousand people would die each day, this man responded that one thousand five hundred would be born. This god beheaded his son, the fire god (*) Kagutsuchi, in a rage. This owner of the Tenkei went to the underworld to find his wife but rejected her when he saw her polluted. He created Amaterasu out of his eye and dipped a spear into the ocean to create eight islands. For 10 points, name this Japanese creator god, the husband of Izanami.

ANSWER: Izanagi

Result: 1540 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 24 - All-Star.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 5584

Question: Shortly before this event, one figure commanded the sun and moon not to shine so that he could secretly steal an herb of immortality. Another figure during this event had to be dragged outside the border of Pallene so that he would lose his strength. Zeus inspired one figure involved in this event with lust so that he would try and rape Hera. Before this event, which saw the deaths of (*) Porphyrion and Alcyoneus, it was foretold that the gods would need a mortal on their side to survive, for which role they chose Heracles. It saw the Fates using bronze cudgels and Hecate using torches to fight against a group of aggressors sent by Gaia. For 10 points, name this invasion of Mount Olympus by large beings.

ANSWER: Gigantomachy [or Gigantomachia; or Giants' War; or anything about fighting giants; do not accept Titanomachy]

Result: 1541 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 25 - Emergency.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 5611

Question: One figure in this work burns a stack of hay, causing a giant oak tree to grow from the ashes, obscuring the sun and moon. The first section of this work describes how the protagonist was birthed by a spirit of the air. (*) Aino drowns herself rather than marry the protagonist, whom she mocks after taking the form of a salmon. Objects in this work include the kantele, an instrument fashioned from the jawbone of a pike, and a magical device forged by Ilmarinen, the sampo. Characters such as Lemminkainen and Vainamoinen appear in, for 10 points, what work compiled by Elias Lonnrot, the national epic of Finland?

ANSWER: Kalevala

Result: 1542 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 3 - Prelims 3.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 5619

Question: This figure's son, Polites, was slain in front of his eyes. This man was originally named Podarces before being sold into slavery by Heracles and rescued by Hesione. This man's wife transformed into a rabid dog in her grief. This man's daughter (*) Polyxena was sacrificed on the tomb of Achilles. This figure was killed on the altar of Zeus by Neoptolemus. His one hundred children included Paris and Hector. For 10 points, name this husband of Hecuba and king of Troy during the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Priam

Result: 1543 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 5 - Prelims 5.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 5676

Question: This deity is exclusively associated with images of a four-winged, key-holding figure wrapped by a serpent with head of a lion. His name is cognate with that of the Vedic deity of contracts and friendship. This figure once fired an arrow at a stone that gushed water and was born from a (*) rock wielding a dagger and a torch. This god's worshippers had seven ranks, and his underground temples featured images of the tauroctony, in which he slays a sacred bull. For 10 points, name this solar deity popular among soldiers whose mystery cult was edged out by Christianity in the Roman Empire.

ANSWER: Mithras [or Mithra; prompt on Mitra]

Result: 1544 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 6 - Playoffs 1.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 5691

Question: In Tibetan myth, the first people of Tibet were born after one of these animals mated with a stone demoness. The Toshogu shrine depicts three of these animals named Mizaru, Kikazaru, and Iwazaru. In the Ramayana, these animals create a bridge to Sri Lanka, and their king is (*) Sugriva. Another of these animals in Hindu myth has the Vajra thrown at him by Indra after he attempts to swallow the sun as a child but is saved by his father, the wind god Vayu. That figure in this form becomes the companion to Rama. For 10 points, name this animal, a mythical example of which is Hanuman.

ANSWER: monkeys

Result: 1545 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 7 - Playoffs 2.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 5707

Question: This deity was syncretized with the funerary god Seker and the scimitar-wielding Tenen. Much of the myth of this god is recorded on the Shabaka Stone. In depictions, a menat hangs from the back of his neck, and he wears a skullcap. The deified physician Imhotep is said to be this god's son. He created the world by imagining words, which became objects when spoken. The reincarnating (*) bull god, Apis, was worshipped in this deity's temple. This consort of Sekhmet created the metal plate that supports the vault of heaven with his skills as a craftsman. For 10 points, name this creator god of Memphis.

ANSWER: Ptah

Result: 1546 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 8 - Playoffs 3.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 5746

Question: Two kings of this city tied their wicked aunt, Dirce, to the horns of a bull by her hair to rescue their mother Antiope. A musician built the lower part of this city by using his lyre to coax the stones into place. This city was ruled jointly by Zethus and that musician, Amphion. The founder of this city killed a dragon sacred to Ares and (*) sowed its teeth in the ground. All this city's inhabitants were turned to stone after its queen, a daughter of Tantalus, insulted Leto and brought down the wrath of Apollo and Artemis. This home of Niobe was founded on the location where a special cow lay down to rest. For 10 points, name this Boetian city founded by Cadmus.

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 1547 | PACE NSC | 2011 | Round: Packet 9 - Playoffs 4.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 5767

Question: One grandson of this deity is Kon the Young. This god was once wounded by a thrown severed head, leading "head of [this god]" to become a figurative phrase meaning "sword." He transformed himself and hid among seals to recover a magic necklace and is conflated with a deity who slept with three women to father the first thrall, peasant, and noble among mankind in the form of (*) Rig. This deity owns the sword Hofund. This gold-toothed rider of the horse Gulltoppr is the son of nine mothers and is able to hear grass grow. For 10 points, name this guardian of Bifrost who will blow the Gjallarhorn to announce Ragnarok.

ANSWER: Heimdallr [accept Rig until mention]

Result: 1548 | Penn Bowl | 2011 | Round: Editors Packet 10 + Minnesota + Some MD | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 45542

Question: One song sung by this man discusses the distribution of beef between his older and younger wives, and this man died at the age of 126. A god who took the form of a bear put this man's party to sleep with magic during one part of their adventure. This man's mother in law was impregnated with this man's wife after being struck by a red arrow, and his name means "divine valor". This man's older brother was killed by the Long-Legged man, whom he had to defeat in order to ascend to his highest position. This man was accompanied by a red three-legged bird on his most important journey, to establish his rule at Yamato. For 10 points, identify this descendent of Amaterasu, the mythical first emperor of Japan.

ANSWER: Jimmu Tenno

Result: 1549 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round02.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 5776

Question: A Talmudic tradition claims that the man who lives in this location is Jacob, while Dante alludes to that man as Cain. Norse mythology interprets this object as a man in a carriage, continuously chased by the wolf Hati. Coyolxauhqui ("co-yol-show-kee") became the goddess of this object when she plotted to kill her mother and Chang'e ("chong-uh") fled here with her rabbit. Tsukuyomi is the embodiment of this object in Japanese mythology. For 10 points, name this astronomical object, associated with Selene in Greek mythology and Luna in Roman mythology.

ANSWER: moon

Result: 1550 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round03.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 5810

Question: One of this city's mythical founders was married to a woman who boasted of being more worthy of worship than Leto, resulting in the death of all her children. In addition to Amphion and Zethus, other inhabitants of this city include a man who founded the city after witnessing a civil war caused by the sowing of a creature's teeth. Others attacked this city under the leadership of kings like Diomedes, in order to avenge the deaths of their fathers. Its seven gates were attacked by seven heroes and defended by Creon. For 10 points, name this city home to Oedipus.

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 1551 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round04.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 5830

Question: This figure's father asked Vafpruoni about the last words said to this deity, whose hall of Breidablik was the most beautiful of them all. In one story, this god's brother is killed but reconciles with him after Ragnarok, and his ship Hringhomi was given a push by Hyrrokin. His son Forseti was the Norse god of justice, and Odin gave this figure a ring called Draupnir. Hel agreed to resurrect this figure on one condition after Loki tricked Hodr into killing him. For 10 points, name this son of Odin who is invulnerable to everything except mistletoe.

ANSWER: Baldr or Baldur or Balder

Result: 1552 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round05.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 5835

Question: This figure was known to the Greeks as Hermes Trismegistus, and was the main god in what would become Hermopolis. As the god of arbitration, this deity oversaw battles between Apep and Ra, Osiris and Set, and Horus and Set. He gambled with the moon for its light to help Nut bear her children. The Egyptians believed him to be the ruler over knowledge and law. In depictions of the Weighing of the Heart, this god was found standing at the side to record the outcome. The patron god of baboons, for 10 points, name this ibis-headed god who invented writing.

ANSWER: Thoth [accept Djehuty]

Result: 1553 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round06.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 5867

Question: This figure was a son of Aphrodite and a minor prince, a nephew to King Priam. He was attacked by Diomedes and later by Achilles, and killed 28 people. One of his lovers burnt his belongings and then killed herself on the pyre, cursing him forever, while Juno sent that lover an easy death. He killed Turnus and married Lavinia, and this man became the ancestor of Remus and Romulus, who eventually founded Rome. For 10 points, name this prince of Troy, who shacked up with with Dido for a year before leaving her to go to Italy.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 1554 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round07.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 5876

Question: This god was rejected by Marpessa in favor of Idas. This father of Aristaeus blasted a crow's feathers black when it informed him of Coronis' affair, and his misfortune with lovers would continue when Hyacinth was killed by a discus. Another of his love interests escaped by turning into a laurel tree, and this pursuer of Daphne cursed Cassandra so that no one would believe her prophecies. This god slew Python and was worshiped at Delphi. For 10 points, name this lyre-playing twin of Artemis, the Greek god of the sun, music, and the arts.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 1555 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round10.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 5936

Question: One mythological figure of this type married a swan-princess before being kidnapped by King Ninud. That person then killed the king's sons and sent their skulls to him. Along with Wayland, another figure of this type was tricked into climbing a fir tree to catch moonlight by Louhi. Ilmarinen and Svarog are both known for this occupation, and the most famous god of this type created Pandora. That god caught his wife and Ares with a golden net and was rendered lame after Hera threw him out of Olympus. For 10 points, name this occupation associated with Hephaestus, which involves forging iron.

ANSWER: blacksmith god [do not accept "fire god"]

Result: 1556 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round11.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 5950

Question: Fostered by several of his kinsmen, this man's beauty was so great that it was feared he would steal their wives and daughters. His skill at hurling allowed him to kill his namesake with a ball, and indirectly bound him into service to a smith. He was taught by Scathach and had a child by her sister Aife, but killed that son. He wielded the Gae Bolg and had "warp spasms." The Morrigan tried to seduce him, and he fought against Queen Medb at the Cattle Raid of Cooley. For 10 points, name this Irish hero, also known as Setanta.

ANSWER: Cu Chulainn [accept Setanta before mention]

Result: 1557 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round12.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 5971

Question: One of this god's forms fell in love with Mayahuel, bringing love into the world. That form, Ehecatl, saved the frozen sun and moon by blowing on them. He threw himself onto a funeral pyre out of remorse for sleeping with a celibate princess, after which his heart became the morning star. He ruled the fifth world cycle during which he mixed his blood with flour made of ground up human bones in order to reintroduce humans to the world. This god's pale skin caused Moctezuma to mistake Hernan Cortez for him. For 10 points, name this feathered serpent.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 1558 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round14.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 6017

Question: In the service of Pasiphae, this man built a wooden cow. Faced with a puzzle involving a string and a conch, this man came up with a solution involving an ant and honey. Instead of giving himself up when the puzzle was revealed as a trap, he poured boiling water over his pursuer, King Minos. He killed his nephew, whom Athena changed into a partridge. This man created the Labyrinth, which housed the Minotaur. For 10 points, name this Greek inventor, a mortal with a son named Icarus.

ANSWER: Daedalus

Result: 1559 | Prison Bowl | 2011 | Round: Round15.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 6022

Question: He led the Ennead as the all-seeing and all-knowing, and ruled the Place of Pillars. This god was associated with the leader of the Ogdoad, Amun. Sekhmet was his follower until she became bloodthirsty and had to be put to sleep. He was not associated with Aten, the sun disk, but during sunrise and sunset he was represented by a scarab beetle and a ram. This god rode on his boat through the underworld during nights, fighting the demon Apep with Set, his strongest follower. For 10 points, name this sun god with a falcon head, often associated with Horus.

ANSWER: Ra or Re

Result: 1560 | SACK | 2011 | Round: Finals 1.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 6039

Question: This man's son appeared in a silk brocaded coverlet at the door of a man whose mare foaled every year but then had its foal abducted by a beast with a giant claw. Teyrnon and his wife then named that son of this man Gwri Golden-Hair. This man crashes the wedding of Hyfaidd Hen's daughter and Clud's son by dressing as a beggar and asking the groom for enough food to fill his magic bag; he eventually tricks Gwawl into becoming the first victim of

ANSWER: Pwyll

Result: 1561 | SACK | 2011 | Round: Packet 02.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 6080

Question: As the daughter of the king of Vidarbha, this figure's marriage was opposed by her brother who had been a friend of Kamsa, although that did not prevent her from becoming queen of Dwarka. In that form she was the mother of Pradyumna and was known as Rukmini. In the story of her birth as Kamala or Padma, she is generally depicted rising from the water on a certain plant. She is said to be one of the fourteen precious things to come from the churning of the milk ocean. In another form she was born from a furrow in a plowed field and was faithful to her husband while imprisoned on Lanka, even though she is often called the "fickle goddess." In that form, she was Sita, the wife of Ramachandra. For 10 points, name this golden-skinned Hindu goddess, the epitome of female beauty, best known as the consort of Vishnu and the goddess of good fortune.

ANSWER: Lakshmi (accept Rukmini until said)

Result: 1562 | SACK | 2011 | Round: Packet 03.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 6104

Question: One attested nickname of this figure is Vindhler which means "wind shelter". Hallinskidi is another nickname of this figure, which may mean "bent stick," and also refers to rams. The man who slept between Ai and Edda to create serfs and Afi and Amma to create herdsmen is said to be this figure, according to the prose introduction to a poem found only in the Codex Wormianus, the Rigsthula. That echoes the suggestion in the first lines of the Voluspa that all races are kinsmen of this figure. In the Husdrapa he fights with another god in the form of a seal in order to retrieve the necklace Brisingamen. This son of nine mothers is destined to be the last of the Aesir to die at Ragnarok where he will kill and be killed by Loki. In addition to the horse Gulltoppr, he is the owner of Gjallarhorn which he will sound to assemble the Aesir. For 10 points, name this Norse god who guards Bifrost, the rainbow bridge to Asgard.

ANSWER: Heimdall

Result: 1563 | SACK | 2011 | Round: Packet 07.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 6171

Question: One of these creatures is ridden by a figure identified with Devasena, the wife of Skanda; that figure is a Hindu goddess from Bangladesh associated with childbirth named Shashti. According to the Welsh Triad, one of these creatures was the offspring of the sow Henwen and haunted the isle of Anglesey, where it was slain either by Sir Cai [read: KAY] or King Arthur. When Typhon attacked Olympus, Artemis hid by assuming the form of one of these creatures. In a contest rigged by Utgard-Loki, Thor was embarrassed when he was unable to lift Jormungandr who had been disguised as one of them. In addition, the footfalls of one of these animals were among the ingredients in fashioning Gleipnir, and some rather large ones pull the chariot of Freya. For 10 points, name this animal whose head was often depicted on the Egyptian goddess Bast.

ANSWER: cats

Result: 1564 | SACK | 2011 | Round: Packet 09.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 6204

Question: According to Herodotus, the dwarfish statues of Pataikos which Phoenicians placed on their triremes' prows were similar to statues of this figure. In Hyginus' list of kings of Athens, Erichthonius was said to be the son of this figure. According to Homer, the youngest of the Charites, Algaia, is the wife of this figure, whose children by other women included Pericletes, a club-bearing robber killed by Theseus, and the aforementioned Erichthonius who was conceived by Gaia after this figure's failed rape of Athena. All this supposedly occurred after his divorce from his original wife whom he caught cheating in an inescapable net. He also trapped his mother with an inescapable golden throne in revenge for the wounds suffered after landing on Lemnos after falling for days when he was cast out of Olympus. For 10 points, name this ugly husband of Aphrodite, the lame son of Hera whose forge was said to be located below Mount Aetna.

ANSWER: Hephaestus (take "Ptah" until mention of Hyginus, and "Vulcan" until mention of Homer)

Result: 1565 | SACK | 2011 | Round: Packet 12.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 6254

Question: "Brimo has given birth to Brimos!" is one phrase associated with this event, which was overseen by the families Eumolpidai and the less-important Kerykes who nevertheless supplied the daduchos and hierokeryx, or the "torchbearer" and "herald of the sacred." Clement of Alexandria transmitted the synthema or "password" associated with this, which begins "I fasted, I drank the kykeon, I took out the covered basket," summarizing the process of initiation. Iacchos was an epithet of Dionysus associated with this practice. The etiology for these rites, which occurred in the month of Boedromion, is recorded in the Homeric Hymn to its central figure, who visited Celeus in the guise of Doso while searching for Kore. For 10 points, name this Greek mystery cult, centered on a town in Attica, which celebrated Triptolemus learning of agriculture from Persephone and Demeter.

ANSWER: Eleusinian Mysteries

Result: 1566 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 53816

Question: In late mythology, this figure became associated with Hathor. With Nephthys, she was one of the four children of Geb and Nut, the earth and sky, and she was the foster mother of Anubis in later myth. After Set cut this goddess's (*) husband into pieces, this mother of Horus brought her husband back to life, making him the ruler of the underworld. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the wife and sister of Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis (accept Aset, Eset, or Ese)

Result: 1567 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 54133

Question: This figure was called Polieos [poh-lee-AY-ohs] for his role in protecting city-states. He fathered Hebe [hee-bee], the cupbearer of the gods, he immortalized his lover Ganymede among the stars, and he swallowed Metis whole. This son of (*) Rhea won the Titanomachy ["titan"-ah-mah-kee] by forcing Cronus to vomit this god's siblings, including Demeter and Hades, allowing the age of Olympians to begin. Hera was the sister-wife of, for 10 points, what lightningwielding chief Greek god?

ANSWER: Zeus Pater (accept Jupiter or Jove until "Greek" is read)

Result: 1568 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 10 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 54087

Question: Two creatures of this type drowned Suttungr's [suht-uhn-ger's] father to obtain Kvasir's [k-vah-seer's] remains, and were named Fjalar [fee-YAH-lahr] and Galar [GAH-lahr]. One of these creatures, Hreidmar [h-RYM-dahr], was killed by his son Fafnir [FAAF-neer] for a ring of cursed gold. The Sons of Ivaldi [ee-vahl-dee] are these creatures, who created Skidbladnir [skid-"blade"-neer] and (*) Mjolnir [mee-YAHL-neer]; and Dvalin [d-VAH-lihn] was one of these who was turned to stone by the sun. For 10 points, name this race of subterranean master smiths in Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Dwarf (accept Dark Elf or Svartálfar)

Result: 1569 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 2 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 53821

Question: This figure wrote the Mahabharata [mah-hah-bah-rah-tah] as dictated by Vyasa [vee-YAH-sah]. In one tale, he received a mango of knowledge when he won a race with his brother, Skanda, by walking around his parents. He was (*) beheaded either by Shani or by Shiva when he defended his bathing mother, Parvati. This god rides a mouse and is known as the Remover of Obstacles. For 10 points, name this Hindu deity with an elephant's head.

ANSWER: Ganesha (accept Ganapati, Vinayaka, or Pillaiyar)

Result: 1570 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 2 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 53834

Question: This deity's birthplace was claimed by both Cythera and Cyprus, and this deity had an affair with the father of Aneas. This deity was the mother of Deimos and Phobos, owned a belt that made the wearer irresistible, and was born when Cronos castrated Uranus. This goddess's affair with (*) Ares was stopped by her husband, Hephaestus, and she was accompanied by Eros. For 10 points, name this Greco-Roman goddess of love and beauty.

ANSWER: Aphrodite or Venus

Result: 1571 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 3 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 53964

Question: This god appeared to his son as the ferryman Graybeard. He was denied by Billing's daughter, but tricked Gunnlod [GOON-loth] into giving him the Meade of Poetry. He possessed two ravens, Hugin [HOO-gihn] and Munin [MOO-nihn], and hung himself on (*) Yggdrasil [IHG-drah-sihl] to gain knowledge of the runes. He wields the spear Gungnir [GOON-g-neer] and rides the eight-legged horse Sleipnir [SLYP-neer]. For 10 points, name this one-eyed chief god of Norse mythology, the father of Thor.

ANSWER: Odin or Wodan

Result: 1572 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 4 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 53985

Question: Utu is this type of god in Sumerian mythology. One goddess of this type hid in a cave after her brother threw a flayed horse at her, and was born from the left eye of Izanagi. In addition to Amaterasu, a god of this type sailed around the (*) world each day in Egyptian mythology, and was at times known as Hathor, Horus, or Atum-Ra. For 10 points, name these gods, who represent the large yellow star in the day sky.

ANSWER: sun deities (accept sun gods and/or goddesses, solar deities, or any clear equivalents)

Result: 1573 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 5 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 54003

Question: In some tales, this god fathered Troilus with Hecuba. He killed the seven sons of Niobe while his sister killed her daughters, and he pursued Daphne until she turned into a laurel tree. When (*) Cassandra would not sleep with this god, he made sure that nobody believed her prophecies, though this god was the patron of oracles. For 10 points, name this son of Leto and twin brother of Artemis, the Greek god of light, music, and prophecy.

ANSWER: Phoebus Apollo

Result: 1574 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 6 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 54006

Question: This god asked worms to bore holes in a conch to make a trumpet, and his blood was used to form the fifth world. As a consequence for sleeping with his sister, this god was exiled by Tezcatlipoca [tet-SCOT-lee-POH-kah] and condemned to float on a raft of snakes. He brought fire from Mictlan [meek-t-lahn] with the help of his twin brother, (*) Xolotl [zoh-LAH-tuhl]. Symbolized by the morning star and once confused with Hernan Cortez, for 10 points, name this feathered-serpent Aztec god.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 1575 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 6 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 54016

Question: Kuzunoha [koo-zoo-no-hah] is one of these creatures, and takes the form of a woman in a Japanese legend. Aesop wrote stories about this animal paired with a sick lion and a crane, and this creature works with Tommy Brock in a story by Beatrix Potter. This creature is known as (*) kitsune [kee-tsoo-nay] in Japan and as Tod in England, and is the title subject of the Reynard cycle in France. For 10 points, name this archetypical trickster, a red, bushy-tailed mammal.

ANSWER: foxes (accept kitsune or spirit-fox before "Aesop" is read)

Result: 1576 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 7 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 54044

Question: This concept, along with fertility, was overseen by the Sumerian goddess Inanna. When she served as the Eye of Ra, the lion-headed Sekhmet was a goddess of this type. The Norse deity of this type will kill and be killed by the hell-hound Garm, and is named (*) Tyr. The Greek god who ruled this had a sister named Eris and was the lover of Aphrodite. For 10 points, name this type of god, exemplified by Ares and Mars.

ANSWER: war deities (accept gods and/or goddesses of war)

Result: 1577 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 8 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 54048

Question: One member of this group of gods gave birth to the Horae and was once a bride of Zeus. This group included Oceanus, Phoebe, and Leto, who were descended from Uranus and Gaia. This group's sun god was Helios, and another member of this group held the world on his (*) back and was called Atlas. This group was led by Chronos and Rhea. Overthrown by Zeus, for 10 points, name this group of Greek gods who preceded the Olympians.

ANSWER: Titans

Result: 1578 | SCOP Novice | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 54071

Question: In the Chinese epic Journey to the West, Xuanzang [shi-AHN tsang] is nearly eaten by female monsters in the form of this creature in Gossamer Cave. A man in this form taught the Navajo how to build looms, and his wife taught them to (*) weave. A woman who competed against Athena was turned into this creature, and was named Arachne. In African folklore, the trickster Anansi is one of these animals. For 10 points, name this eight-legged creature.

ANSWER: spiders

Result: 1579 | St. Anselms and Torrey Pines | 2011 | Round: Finals 1.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 6260

Question: In one encounter, this figure beat his opponent so furiously that both became enclosed in a cloud of the victim's excrement. This grandson of Cathbad was aided by his father Lugh in defeating the armies of Morrigan, and this figure's death came when he was struck by a magic spear and subsequently tied himself to a rock to die honorably. This figure was trained by Scathach, who gave him his spear [*] Gae Bolg, and his death occurred after he ate dog meat. This hero had seven toes, fingers and eyes, and he single-handedly defeated Queen Maeve during the Cattle Raid of Cooley. For 10 points, name this epic hero of the Ulster Cycle, the Celtic slayer of the hound of a similar name.

ANSWER: Cu Chulainn [or Setanta]

Result: 1580 | St. Anselms and Torrey Pines | 2011 | Round: Finals 2.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 6295

Question: This entity is said to end in Himinbjorg, and it is also called Asbru and in Gylfaginning, High notes that this entity is not used by Thor, who instead uses Kormt and Ormt. This entity parallels another called Gjallarbru, and according to Grimnismal, this entity is always on fire. Some accounts believe it to be the [*] Milky Way, and it consists of only three colors. When the sons of Muspell ride over this structure, it will break and the Gjallarhorn will be blown by its guardian, who can hear grass growing on the other side of the world. For 10 points, name this rainbow bridge of Norse mythology, guarded by Heimdall.

ANSWER: Bifrost [accept Asbru before mentioned]

Result: 1581 | St. Anselms and Torrey Pines | 2011 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 6303

Question: This god's mother gave birth in the form of a sparrowhawk, and, in one story, this god was born when his mother was impregnated with divine fire. In a competition with another god, this god painted a wooden boat to look like stone, causing his wood boat to float and his opponent's stone boat to sink. This god's mother intended that he bring about revenge on her [*] husband's killer, Set, who scattered the husband's fourteen pieces all over Egypt. The Wedjat (wi-jaht) eye is the symbol for this god and pharaohs were believed to be reincarnations of this god. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god, the son of Isis and Osiris who is depicted with the head of a falcon.

ANSWER: Horus [or Neferkhor; or Harsiesis; or Hor; or Har]

Result: 1582 | St. Anselms and Torrey Pines | 2011 | Round: Round 10.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 4760

Question: This figure's son was one of the seven against Thebes and was named Parthenopaios. One of this figure's feats occurred after King Oineus forgot to make a sacrifice to Artemis. After killing the centaurs Rhaecus and Hylaeus, this figure joined with others such as Peleus and [*] Meleager and drew first blood in their hunt for the Calydonian boar. This figure was turned into a lion for making love in a temple of Zeus with her husband Melanion. Raised by a she-bear, for 10 points, name this fleet-footed Greek huntress who lost a race after her opponent threw golden apples as a distraction.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 1583 | St. Anselms and Torrey Pines | 2011 | Round: Round 11.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 6342

Question: In one form, this god tears out of a pillar and kills a demon at twilight in a courtyard. This slayer of Hiranyakashipu has a form that is half-man, half-lion and lives on his snake Adishesha in the milky ocean. He also took three steps to conquer the three worlds in his form Vamana. In most depictions, this god is holding a mace, lotus, conch, and chakra, and he coerced Amrit from the asuras in the form of the temptress Mohini. The [*] Dashavatara consists of ten avatars of this deity, including Narasimha, Krishna, and Rama, and his wife is named Lakshmi. For 10 points, name this member of the Hindu trimurti, the preserver of the universe.

ANSWER: Vishnu [prompt on "Narasimha" before "half-man, half-lion", don't accept afterwards]

Result: 1584 | St. Anselms and Torrey Pines | 2011 | Round: Round 12.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 6378

Question: The Vedas describe the first of these animals to emerge from the churning of the oceans; it was named Uchchaihshravas ("ooch-chai-shra-vas"). In Islam, one of these animals called Buraq accompanied Muhammad and Gabriel to Jerusalem. The Phoenicians portrayed a water version of these animals with coiling, fish-like hindquarters. In Celtic myth, [*] Epona was associated with their role in travel. Loki mated with one of these animals, Svadilfari, to produce an eight-legged one of these, Sleipnir. Poseidon was associated with these animals, and Bellerophon rode a winged one named Pegasus to slay the Chimera. For 10 points, name these animals which served as steeds for mythological figures.

ANSWER: horses

Result: 1585 | St. Anselms and Torrey Pines | 2011 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 6446

Question: This figure dreams about presenting a heavy copper axe to his mother, the goddess Ninsun. This figure had ominous dreams depicting two dead figures when he embarked on a journey with a "shaggy" companion to kill a monstrous forest keeper known as Humbaba. This god sought the help of [*] Utnapishtim ("oot-na-pish-tim") in order to become immortal and avoid the fate of his deceased companion. When this figure refused to lay with the goddess Ishtar, her father An sent the Bull of Heaven to kill him, but he defeated it with the help of Enkidu. For 10 points, name this "two-thirds" divine king of Uruk, the hero of a Mesopotamian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh [accept Bilgames; do not accept or prompt on "Girugamesh"]

Result: 1586 | St. Anselms and Torrey Pines | 2011 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 6457

Question: This man stole an eye from three sisters that shared that eye and one tooth in order to find the location of the Hesperides (hes-pear-ih-dees). While returning from his most famous quest, this man saved an Ethiopian woman from a monster named Ceto, and this hero accidentally killed Acrisius in a discus-throwing competition. The gift of a helmet of [*] invisibility belonging to Hades allowed this hero to escape from Euryale (yoo-ray-lee) and Stheno, and his reflective shield, given by Athena, caused his enemy to turn into stone from her own glance. For 10 points, name this Greek hero, the husband of Andromeda and slayer of Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 1587 | St. Anselms and Torrey Pines | 2011 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 6505

Question: This deity's sacred birds include the woodpecker and eagle owl. This father-in-law of Procne was the only Olympian not invited to the wedding of Hippodameia and Peirithous. This god's Stymphalian birds guarded his temple on the Black Sea, and Otus and Ephialtes threw him into chains and put him in a bronze urn. This god's daughter Penthesilea was slain by Achilles at Troy, and Athena and Hera encouraged Diomedes to wound this god, whose daughters include [*] Hippolyta. This god fathered Eros with Aphrodite, with whom he was caught in a golden net by Hephaestos. For 10 points, name this killer of Adonis and father of Phobos and Deimos, the Greek god of War.

ANSWER: Ares

Result: 1588 | St. Anselms and Torrey Pines | 2011 | Round: Sample Packet.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 6530

Question: Princess Deiamei of Skyros bore this man a son while he was pretending to be a woman, but his disguise was ruined when he selected a spear from a bag of gifts. This man killed Queen Penthesilea by stabbing her through the heart but fell in love with her as the dying Amazon queen's hair tumbled out. When Chryseis was given up by Agamemnon, this man's concubine Briseis was demanded as compensation. The son of this leader of the Myrmidons killed Polyxena and Priam; that son was named Neoptolemus. This man's cousin Patroclus was killed by Hector. For 10 points, name this Greek champion whose only weak point was his heel.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 1589 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_ASU_B+RPI.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 6576

Question: In the second verse of this figure's sahasranama hymn is the name "buddha," though it most likely does not refer to Siddhartha Gautama. This figure is sometimes depicted as having three wives representing prosperity, intelligence, and spirit. The Mudgala Purana is dedicated to the devotees of this deity, who are called (*) Ganapatyas. In the first of his incarnations described in the Purana, he takes the form of Vakratunda, the twisting trunk, an embodiment of Brahman in order to overcome the demon Matsaryasura, while his seventh and eighth incarnations correspond to Vishnu and Shiva. This deity is also notably worshiped by many followers of Jainism, and is known in Buddhism as Vinayaka. FTP, name this remover of obstacles, a Hindu deity with the head of an elephant.

ANSWER: Ganesha [accept Ganapati or Pillaiyar]

Result: 1590 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_ASU_B+RPI.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 6583

Question: In one story, this god's daughter Alcippe was sexually assaulted by Halirrhothius. That murder resulted in the first trial in history at a location later called the Rock of this god. In another tale, Otus and Ephialtes, the Aloadae, imprisoned this god in a bronze vessel for over a year, and he was freed from that imprisonment by Hermes. One of this god's sons, Lycaon, was turned into a wolf as punishment for attempting to kill Zeus. Another of this god's sons, Oenomaus, was killed when he flew off his chariot because a bronze bolt was replaced with a wax one. At Troy, Diomedes wounded this god with the help of Athena, and this god attempted to avenge the killing of his daughter Penthesileia by Achilles. In some legends, this god with Harmonia is considered to be the father of the Amazons. For 10 points, name this lover of Aphrodite, the Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares

Result: 1591 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_Chicago A.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 6591

Question: In the form of Nicippe, the priestess of a grove at Dotium, this figure threw the curse of perpetual hunger upon the man who tried to chop down her grove, Erysichthon. With the titan Iasius she produced the children Philomelus and Ploutus. In another story, she assumes the form of the old woman Doso and her (*) sadness is alleviated somewhat by the jokes of Iambe, after which she bathes a baby boy in fire every night in order to burn away his mortality. This stay in the house of Demophoon' parents is described in the Homeric hymn to this figure which describes the foundation of the Eleusinian mysteries. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess who gave Triptolemus a plow and some other agricultural tools, and who was the mother of Persephone.

ANSWER: Demeter

Result: 1592 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_Columbia A+Toronto.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 6613

Question: In one story, this god kills the goddess of food, Ogetsuhime, which introduced silk worms and the five staple grains of Japan into the world. A figure entitled the Foot-Stroking Elder was his steward at this god's palace in Izumo. In another tale, this god made many attempts on Okuninushi's life after he fell in love with this god's daughter, Suseri-hime. When this god was born, his incessant crying and shrieking for his mother, (*) Izanami, caused his banishment to the underworld. While departing, he challenged his sister to a competition wherein he created five gods from Amaterasu's necklace and then threw a flayed horse at her. FTP, name this Japanese god of storms and wielder of Grasscutter who was created from Izanagi's nose and was brother to Amaterasu and Tsukuyomi.

ANSWER: Susano'o-no-mikoto [accept Susanowo or Susanowa, prompt on "His-Swift-impetuous-Male-Augustness"]

Result: 1593 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_Harvard+Queens_A.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 6641

Question: Both the Syrian warrior goddess Anat and the Canaanite mother goddess Astarte are sometimes identified as this figure's wife. This god's sister disguised herself as an old woman to reach the Island-in-the-Midst, where she cheated this god out of the white crown of Egypt. One story about this god, whose cult was centered at Avaris, describes how his boat sank in a race after his opponent painted his own boat to look like stone. Another story about this husband of (*) Nephthys describes how he took the form of a hippopotamus in one battle, while he squares off daily with the serpent Apep as Ra's barque travels across the underworld. The bizarre "Typhonic Beast" represents this god of the desert who was worshiped by the Hyksos and famously dismembered his brother before being defeated by his nephew, Horus. For 10 points, identify this Egyptian god of storms and chaos who slew his brother, Osiris.

ANSWER: Set [Accept Seth, Sutekh, or Setan]

Result: 1594 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_Laferbrook.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 6659

Question: In one story, this object was thrown out of Olympus after Electra, the daughter of Atlas, tried to hide in it to avoid Zeus. This object once changed hands due to the scheming of Antenor, who explained how it could be obtained, and repentance for the theft of this object figures in a story by Sinon. This object was brought to its most famous location by Dardanus, and may have taken its name from a friend killed by its creator in an accident. Along with the arrival of Neoptolemus and Philoctetes, the (*) acquisition of this object was the final condition for the fulfilment of a prophecy by Helenus, and it was eventually acquired by the joint efforts of Diomedes and Odysseus. For ten points, identify this object which had to be stolen by the Argives before Troy could fall, a statuette located in the Trojan temple of Athena whose name comes from Athena's most common epithet .

ANSWER: Palladium

Result: 1595 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_Minnesota+Duke.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 6689

Question: A misheard message from the Egyptian Thamus may have created the myth that this God is the only one of his kind who has died "in our time." This God's seduction of Eupheme resulted in the Bowman of the Zodiac, Crotus, while his seduction of Echo resulted in Iynx.. Various sources state that his mother may be Dryope or Oeneis, but in another tale, this God was conceived when his father visited Penelope in the form of a Goat or Amaltheia. His attempted pursuit of (*) Pitys resulted in her transformation into a fir-tree, while his pursuit of Syrinx resulted in her becoming a reed. His homeland was in the state of Arcadia, and his Roman counterpart is the god Faunus. FTP, name this god who is often depicted as a faun with an erect penis, who may be considered the god of nature.

ANSWER: Pan

Result: 1596 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_Penn.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 6709

Question: This figure once played a trick on an entranced Sir Alisander by chauffeuring him around on horseback which lead to Alisander being struck in the face. This man and his half-brother were rescued from Sir Breuse Sance Pitie by Dinadan. The battle that resulted in this man's death began when one soldier mistakenly drew a sword after being stung by an adder. His father tried to kill him shortly after his birth by sending him and all the babies born on May-Day out to sea. In one story, this figure's most famous love interest rebuffed his advances and was bombarded by cannon balls in the Tower of London, while in another version she was more receptive to his advances, while her husband was fighting Lucius. That event precipitated that aforementioned battle at Camlann where this man killed and was killed by his father. FTP, name this son of Morgause, the half-brother of Agravain and lover of Guinevere, who killed Arthur.

ANSWER: Mordred or Medraut or Medrod

Result: 1597 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_Penn.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 6711

Question: In one appearance by this character, he pledges to take down the crime-ridden city of Bomb Queen, who in retaliation attempts to discredit this man by stealing his sperm and impregnating herself with it. In another appearance, a caricature of this man is given the first name John and switches bodies with a Japanese teenager named Adachi, while in the comic book series Drafted a mostly-mute version of this man has his family disintegrated by aliens before taking up the mantle as leader of a group of survivors in Chicago. A notable issue of The (*) Amazing Spider-Man saw that hero expose an attempt by the Chameleon to steal this man's most notable position by assuming his identity. FTP, name this real-life figure who in another disturbing manga travels to Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso's residence for a sex scene involving John McCain and Hillary Clinton.

ANSWER: Barack Obama

Result: 1598 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_Penn.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 6717

Question: The Garcia-Koelling experiment discovered constraints on this paradigm due to the close relations of flavor with X-ray-induced nausea. A mathematical model describing this paradigm calls lambda maximum associative strength and states that the incremental change in strength is proportional to factors like salience. That is the Rescorla-Wagner model. A more traditional experiment at Johns Hopkins saw the subject come to fear all (*) white fluffy things due to stimulus generalization common to this form of learning. That experiment saw a CR of crying to a harmless rat eventually evoked thanks to the banging of metal behind a child's head. FTP, name this type of learning exemplified by the Little Albert experiment, as well as teaching a dog to salivate at the sound of a bell, a type of conditioning elucidated by Pavlov.

ANSWER: classical conditioning/learning [accept just classical at end; accept Pavlovian conditioning until "Pavlov"]

Result: 1599 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_Penn.doc | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 6728

Question: One king of this name descended into insanity before his wife Caroline Matilda had an affair with Johann Struensse, whom that king had executed. One king of this name funded the expeditions of James Hall. One king of this name was wounded by a bunch of splinters while on the ship Trinity during the Battle of Colberger Heide; that was part of Tortenson's War. The first king of this name declared himself Count of Holstein in the Treaty of Ribe. One king of this name dismissed prime minister Carl Theodore Zahle after the Schleiswig Plebiscites didn't go his way, in an event known as the Easter Crisis. The second king of this name was anointed by Gustav Trolle, and notably ordered that the bodies of Sten Sture the Younger be exhumed and set on fire during a visit to Stockholm. Several kings with this name are members of the House of Oldenburg, which was founded by the first king of this name. The final king of this name, who was the brother of Haakon VII, was apocryphally said to wear a yellow Star of David on his sleeve in solidarity with persecuted Jews. FTP, give this name, which is shared by ten kings of Denmark.

ANSWER: Christian

Result: 1600 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_UNC_A+OSU_B+UW_B.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 6730

Question: A number named after this figure that characterizes fluidity was named by Markus Reiner after a line in this figure's namesake "Song" that says, "the mountains flowed before the Lord." One account of this figure's most notable battle mentions only Naphtali and Zebulun as groups who took part, while a succeeding chapter featuring this figure mentions other tribes having participated as well; that battle pitted ten thousand men against nine hundred steel chariots. This figure was aided in victory in that battle when the opposing commander, (*) Sisera, had a tent spike driven through his head by the Kenite Yael, and the military commander supported in that battle by this prophet was Barak. This prophet notably rendered verdicts from beneath a palm tree in mount Ephraim. FTP, name this figure, the only female Biblical Judge.

ANSWER: Deborah or Dvorah

Result: 1601 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_UVA.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 6759

Question: This man's brothers founded Cilicia and Phoenicia, and his daughter Autonoe bore a son who would eventually be torn to pieces by his own hounds. This man also fathered Semele and, in his later life, he and his wife were turned into snakes. That wife of this man was the daughter of Aphrodite and Ares to whom Hephaestus gave a cursed necklace in revenge. This man was ordered by Athena to sow the earth with (*) dragon's teeth, creating warriors who would help him found his city, which he reached after being ordered to follow a cow instead of continuing to search for his abducted sister. For 10 points, name this brother of Europa, husband of Harmonia, and founder of Thebes.

ANSWER: Cadmus

Result: 1602 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_UW A+Columbia_B.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 6774

Question: This figure was married to a king who was the son of Drott and succeeded by his son Dagr Spaka.

ANSWER: Hel

Result: 1603 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_UW A+Columbia_B.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 6784

Question: One monarch of this name was traumatized by the murder-suicide of her son Rudolf in the Mayerling Incident, and was later shanked in the heart by Luigi Luncheni on Lake Geneva, expiring after removing her corset which had hidden the injury. The wife of Franz Josef I bore this name, as did a woman whose actions, revealed to Emperor Mathias by Gyorgy Thurzo, led to the rise of the lesser Hungarian gentry after they tired of that woman of this name (*) mutilating their daughters for sport. Three different Shuvalovs served a monarch of this name, whose 1761 death bailed Prussia out of the Seven Years' War after the ascendancy of Peter III. The niece of Stefan Bathory and daughter of Peter the Great bore this name, as did a monarch saved by Francis Walsingham from the Babington Plot, which prompted her to execute Mary, Queen of Scots. For 10 points, identify this name shared by a famous "Virgin Queen" of England.

ANSWER: Elizabeth [or Elisabeth or Elizaveta or Yelisavet or Erzsebet]

Result: 1604 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_UW A+Columbia_B.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 6786

Question: Similar to Horus, this deity was often depicted with winged arms and holding an ankh and a scepter. Akhenaten repeatedly emphasized his adherence to this deity's principle, which was the opposite of what Isfet stood for. Without this deity, it was believed that Nun would reclaim the universe, and this goddess is considered a daughter of Ra. The (*) forty-two negative confessions detailed on the Papyrus of Ani describe the basis of judgment of a ritual involving this deity, and those who failed that test had their souls devoured by Ammit.

ANSWER: Maat [or Ma'at or M?t or Mayet]

Result: 1605 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_VCU.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 6807

Question: According to one story, this figure founded a city when his efforts in digging up a mushroom revealed a spring. That city was ruled by Electryon and Sthenelus, members of a namesake dynasty he founded. When this ruler was unable to assume the throne of Argos, he traded realms with Megapenthes. This man was sent on a quest by a king of Seriphus named (*) Polydectes during which he stole the tooth and eye of the Graeae. He rescued the daughter of Cassiopea and Cepheus from a sea monster before taking that girl, Andromeda, as his wife. His mother Danae was locked in a tower by King Acrisius to avoid a prophecy, but he was conceived by Zeus in the form a stream of gold. For 10 points, name this hero who used winged sandals and the helmet of invisibility to slay Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 1606 | Terrapin Invitational | 2011 | Round: FINAL_WillZafar.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 6817

Question: Prayers to this deity, who is sometimes given an epithet meaning "receiver of many," often involve hitting one's hand on the ground and a sacrifice of a black sheep. According to the Suda, this deity is the father of Macaria, the goddess of a blessed afterlife. The narcissus is a sacred flower to this deity, and this figure's wife once turned one of his attempted conquests into the (*) mint plant. This figure imprisoned Theseus and Pirithous with snakes when the pair attempted to kidnap Helen and this figure's wife. This figure is given a helmet of invisibility by the Cyclops which he sometimes lends to men. This figure tricked his wife into staying with him by giving her a pomegranate to eat, which forced her to return to his domain for one third of the year. FTP, name this husband of Persephone, the Greek god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Hades

Result: 1607 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 1 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 30746

Question: According to one story, this man's death was a plot hatched by Naupilus to punish his apathy over the slaying of Palamedes. He is wounded by Coon, and is tricked when Zeus sends Oneiros to talk to him in the form of Nestor. This man's offer of seven women and seven cities is turned down. He insults the priest (*) Chryses and takes his daughter, causing Apollo to spread a plague by firing golden arrows. This man exiles Thyestes after the death of his father Atreus. He causes Achilles to withdraw from the war by claiming his lover Briseis for his own. He takes Cassandra as a slave after the Trojan War, which he returns from only to be killed by his wife's lover Aegisthus. For 10 points, name this King of Mycenae and brother of Menelaus who leads the Greek coalition in the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Agammemnon

Result: 1608 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 10 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 44805

Question: This man's visit to the Oracle at Delphi yielded advice not to loosen the mouth of his wineskin until he had come to power. The fifty sons of this man's brother Pallas tried to usurp his throne. He bore a son named Medus, who nearly became heir when this man's wife Medea attempted to poison his true son. While in Troezen, this man slept with Aethra on the same night that Poseidon did, and left his sword and sandals (*) under a heavy rock for when his son grew of age. After losing a war to King Minos, he agreed to send seven boys and seven girls as tribute each year. He threw himself into the sea after seeing a ship with black sails instead of white, which his son had forgotten to change out after slaying the Minotaur. For 10 points, name this father of Theseus and namesake of a major sea of Greece.

ANSWER: Aegeus

Result: 1609 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 11 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 44828

Question: The birth of this figure caused the Lapith king Phlegyas to set fire to the temple at Delphi. One of the few oracles not centered on prediction was located at Epidaurus and dedicated to this figure. Athena gave this figure the blood that flowed from both the left and right veins of Medusa. His death caused his father to kill the (*) Cyclopses in a fit of rage. Before his birth, the crow was changed in color from white to black after it told of his mother Coronis's affair with Ischys. He was pulled out of his mother's womb as she burned in a funeral pyre, and was raised by the centaur Chiron. This father of Hygieia, Iaso, and Panacea was killed by Zeus's thunderbolt after raising Hippolytus from the dead. For 10 points, name this son of Apollo who bore a staff wrapped in serpents and was a god of healing.

ANSWER: Asclepius

Result: 1610 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 12 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 44946

Question: Gilgamesh has a dream in which he embraces one of these objects that falls from the sky. In the story of Bricrui's Feast, Cuchulainn proves he deserves the champion's portion of the meal by standing up to a giant wielding one of these weapons. Because his grandfather Aleus hides his arms, Ancaeus is forced to face the Caledonian Boar wielding only the labrys, a type of this weapon. One of these weapons is used to kill twenty-one generations of Kshatriyas and to sever Ganesh's broken tusk. That example is wielded by the sixth avatar of Vishnu. In the Odyssey, (*) twelve of them are lined up so that Odysseus can shoot an arrow through their handles. Hephaestus uses either a rock or one of these weapons to split Zeus's head during the birth of Athena. For 10 points, name this weapon which is used by Paul Bunyan to chop down trees.

ANSWER: axe

Result: 1611 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 13 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 45133

Question: He's not Apollo, but the tradition of wearing wreaths to commemorate victories is often traced to this figure, as is the custom of wearing metal rings with stones set in them. Thetis married Peleus after this character advised Zeus not to marry her. This figure divided a sacrificial bull into two parts, tricking a god into taking the pile of bones by covering it in fat. In one version of the Io story, this character tells her that her suffering will end when she gets to Egypt. He helped Heracles with his (*) eleventh labor by advising him to ask Atlas to retrieve the apples of the Hesperides. According to one story, the centaur Chiron gave up his immortality for the sake of this figure. With Clymene, he bore a son who married Pyrrha and survived the flood. This father of Deucalion warned his brother against marrying Pandora and had his liver eaten out repeatedly by an eagle. For 10 points, name this son of Iapetus and Themis who was punished for stealing fire from the gods.

ANSWER: Prometheus

Result: 1612 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 14 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 45158

Question: Herodotus claims that this man gave his throne as an offering at Delphi. After an oracle told this man that a chasm in the town of Celaenae would close if he threw his most valuable possession in it, his son Anchurus threw himself into the hole. Another story relates that as a baby, ants carried grains of wheat into his mouth. This son of Gordius was noted for discovering black and white lead, and in one version committed suicide by drinking bull's blood when his kingdom was overrun by Cimmerians. Some reeds revealed an embarrassing secret about this man after his barber dug a hole in the ground to conceal it. That secret involved his possession of (*) donkey ears, which he was given for judging a music contest between Apollo and Marsyas. One of his traits was washed away in the Pactolus River and granted after his kind treatment of Silenus. For 10 points, name this wealthy king of Phrygia who had a golden touch.

ANSWER: King Midas

Result: 1613 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 15 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 45257

Question: One legend claims that this man became ruler of the land of Dascylitis, and another holds that he founded the kingdom of Scepsis with Scamandrius. The presence of a shooting star and a flame above this figure's head are interpreted as an omen by one character. Juno sends her son Cupid to earth in the form of this character to inflame the passions of a queen. He notes that his group has fulfilled a Harpy's prophecy by (*) eating the bread they use as a table. This character kills Remulus to revive his side's fortunes in a war which was sparked by his shooting of a favorite stag. He is succeeded by his brother Silvius as king of Alba Longa, a city he founds after leaving Lavinium. This grandson of Anchises holds his father's hand as he flees Troy. For 10 points, name this son of Aeneas.

ANSWER: Ascanius [or Iulus]

Result: 1614 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 2 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 30794

Question: This man is raised in exile by the king Budic I. This man starts a campaign to steal the stones of the "Giant's Ring" in order to commemorate those killed in the "Night of the Long Knives." He attacks his rival's son Paschent after the appearance of the strange heavenly sign that gave him his name. This man helps place his brother Ambrosius on the throne after avenging their father by defeating the usurper Vortigern. He wins a battle against Octa and Eosa but dies shortly after when his well is poisoned. In his most famous story, he is magically made to look like (*) Gorlois, which helps him sneak into Tintagel Castle and impregnate the beautiful Igraine. In exchange, this man must give his first-born son to Merlin. For 10 points, name this father of King Arthur.

ANSWER: Uther Pendragon

Result: 1615 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 3 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 31051

Question: In Native-American myth, Raven shakes a raspberry bush and it becomes one of these animals. In a Korean story, a bear transforms into one of these creatures with the aid of twenty cloves of garlic. In the Mabinogion, the three sons of Gwydion and Gilfaethwy are transformed into these animals by Math. In Chinese mythology, droplets of water become these creatures when they are flicked off a vine by Nu Gua. In Greek mythology, Pyrrha and Deucalion throw (*) stones that become these animals. A Norse poem tells of how Heimdall assumes the guise of Rig to become the father of this race. Tantalus received his punishment for tricking the gods into eating the meat of this animal, which is the answer Sphinx's riddle. For 10 points, name this species of Pandora and Odysseus.

ANSWER: human beings [or mankind; or man; or woman; accept equivalents]

Result: 1616 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 4 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 44367

Question: One character in this work crushes one hundred bags that supposedly contain flour but actually hold armed warriors. A group of characters in this work become experts at making saddles, shields, and shoes, but each time are driven out of town by jealous craftsmen. Two characters in this work become stuck to a golden bowl in a castle, which disappears until (*) Manawydan's threats to hang a mouse bring it back. One of its characters must have his feet held in the lap of a virgin whenever there is peace. In the first section of this work, Arawn trades places with Pwyll for a year and Rhiannon is forced to carry people on her back after the disappearance of her son Pryderi. For 10 points, name this work which includes four branches and which tells stories from Welsh mythology.

ANSWER: Four Branches of the Mabinogi [or the Mabinogion; accept Second Branch of the Mabinogi until "saddles"]

Result: 1617 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 5 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 44389

Question: Ovid tells a story in which this character protests that he has already met his fate when it is told to him by the seer Telemus. This son of Thoosa is seen washing his face by Aeneas, who hears his story from Achaemenides before being chased by him. In the Metamorphoses, he plays a one hundred reed pipe and sings a pair of songs to his lover. When his songs prove ineffective in securing the love of (*) Galatea, he throws a boulder at his rival Acis, whose blood is transformed into a river. In one story, this character shouts out curses against a person named "nobody" after being tricked by men who consume his cheese and ride the underside of sheep out of his cave. For 10 points, name this Cyclops who is blinded by Odysseus in the Odyssey.

ANSWER: Polyphemus

Result: 1618 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 7 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 44549

Question: In Greek mythology, Olenus chooses to accept this fate so that he can be with his wife Lethaea, who claims she is more beautiful than any goddess. In Incan mythology, Auca, Cachi, Ucho and their brother Manco Capac all meet this fate. In order to prevent the marriage of his daughter Thrud, Thor tricks the dwarf (*) Alvis into suffering this fate, which befell the residents of Svartalfheim during the daylight. After Apollo and Artemis killed her children, Niobe wept eternally despite suffering this end. According to one story, the Titan Atlas met this fate at the hands of Perseus, who had avoided it with a shiny shield. For 10 points, name this transformation that can be caused by the head of Medusa.

ANSWER: being turned to stone [accept logical equivalents]

Result: 1619 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 8 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 44587

Question: After Demeter punished King Erysicthon with insatiable hunger, this deity gave his daughter Mestra the power to shape shift, allowing her to be sold into slavery many times. Idomeneus was driven from Crete after sacrificing his own son to this god. After Pelops was brought back to life, he became the lover of this deity. The mediator Briareus gave this god the land around the Isthmus of Corinth to settle his dispute with (*) Helios. Along with Apollo, this deity grew angry after not being paid his wages for the year he spent indentured to King Laomedon, building the walls of Troy. The tapestry woven by Athena in her contest against Arachne depicted this god losing a contest to become the patron deity of Athens. For 10 points, name this husband of Amphitrite and father of Triton, the Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 1620 | VCU Open | 2011 | Round: 9 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 44620

Question: One monster from this country has the head of a monkey and a snake as its tail and can turn into a flying black cloud. Another myth from this place holds that objects that turn one hundred years old can transform into supernatural beings. A being from this place leaves no footprints as she wanders the snow, offering a child to unsuspecting people who are frozen in place when they try to help. This country is also home to a reptilian river imp which holds water in an indentation in its skull, and a (*) fox that can have up to nine tails. Another creature from this place carries a club called a kanabo, and has horns, three toes, three fingers, and an ogre like appearance. For 10 points, name this country of the kappa, kitsune, and oni, which are often included in stories of Shinto gods.

ANSWER: Japan

Result: 1621 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: Bellarmine and UCLA.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 6846

Question: A chryselephantine statue of this deity had her holding a pomegranate and a scepter with a cuckoo on it and was found at Argos. Another temple to this Greek goddess lay in Paestum, Italy. This patron deity of Samos was often symbolized by the peacock and the cow. One of this goddess's daughters was replaced by Ganymede as cupbearer to the gods and was named Hebe. Hephaestus fell for a whole day after this figure threw him off Mount Olympus. She tried to get back at her husband through his illegitimate offspring like Apollo, Dionysus, and Hercules. For 10 points, name this Greek analogue of Juno, the wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera [accept Juno until "Greek"]

Result: 1622 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: Chipola.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 6871

Question: This god put Delphinus in the stars after the latter helped him court his wife. He and Apollo were forced to build the walls of Troy for King Laodemon after attempting to overthrow Zeus. In another story, this god fathered Despoena and Arion when he seduced Demeter in the form of a stallion, and his wife transformed Scylla into a barking monster after Scylla had an affair with this figure. He lost a contest to Athena when she gave Cecrops an olive branch, thus giving her patronage of Athens. Out of wedlock, he was the father of the Cyclops Polyphemus, and with his wife Amphitrite, he fathered Triton. For 10 points, name this trident-wielding Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 1623 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: Claremont and Michigan.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 6879

Question: In one story this creature holds up the sky by leaning on a rock after switching places with a rabbit that promised to bring back a stick but never returned. In one myth, this figure tells two ducks to dive down and creates earth from the mud one of them brought back. This creature also ruins the practice of returning things from the dead after embracing his wife one day too early. According to various myths, this figure founded the earth with his brother Cirape, or with Puma. A Nez Perce tale tells the story of this figure and the Shadow People. For 10 points, name this analogue of Raven, a canine Native American trickster god.

ANSWER: Coyote [or Ola'li or Sedit or Ueuecoyotl]

Result: 1624 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: Maryland A.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 6946

Question: According to Ovid, this Roman deity was conceived by Juno and a fertile flower. The Pantheon was located in a field named for this deity. This figure was originally an agricultural god, before that role was transferred to Ceres. In early times, this god was part of a triad worshipped by priests called Salii with Jupiter and Quirinus, and he later received the epithet "Ultor," or "the Avenger." This god raped the Vestal Virgin Rhea Silvia, who gave birth to Romulus and Remus. In one story, this deity was caught in a trap laid by Vulcan having an affair with the latter's wife, Venus. For 10 points, name this Roman war god, the equivalent of the Greek Ares.

ANSWER: Mars [do not accept "Ares"]

Result: 1625 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: Northwestern and Cornell.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 6974

Question: This god fathered Magni by the giantess Jarnsaxa. This god threatened to kill Loki after he had cut off the hair of this god's wife. His chariot is pulled by Tanngnjost and Tanngrisni, two goats, and he lives in Bilskirnir. In Jotunheim, this man was challenged, and failed, to lift the cat of the king of the Frost Giants, Utgard-Loki. He reduced the giant Hrungnir to rubble. At Ragnarok, this figure and Jormungandr, the Midgard Serpent, will kill each other. On one occasion, this god dressed up as Freya and killed Thrym, who had stolen his prized possession. The husband of Sif, for 10 points, name this owner of the hammer Mjollnir, the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 1626 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: Ohio State.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 6982

Question: One figure sometimes included in this group killed the demon Asuradhenuka. The fifth of these was a dwarf who defeated Bali, while the first was a fish who warned Manu, the first human, of an impending flood. Besides Vamana and Matsya, one of these figures killed Kartavirya Arjuna and his family, and takes the form of a later one wielding an axe. Buddha is usually said to be the ninth of these, while the last one will appear on a white horse at the end of the world and is named Kalki. They include the speaker of the Bhagavad-Gita, Krishna, and the hero of a namesake epic, Rama. For 10 points, name these ten figures, earthly reincarnations of the Hindu preserver god.

ANSWER: avatars of Vishnu

Result: 1627 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: Oxford.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 7006

Question: According to the Tummal Inscription, this man and his son restored the temple district of Nippur. He defeated a siege launched by Agga of Kish. Eventually, he managed to go past Mount Mashu to a garden full of jewels and eventually sought the advice of the alewife Siduri. This man was the father of Urlugal and the son of Ninsun and Lugulbanda. He gained his best friend after that friend had a week's worth of sex with Shamhat. He sought immortality from Utnapishtim after he and the aforementioned friend defeated Humbaba. With that friend, Enkidu, he killed the Bull of Heaven sent by Ishtar. For 10 points, identify this hero-king of Uruk in a Sumerian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 1628 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: RPI A.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 7048

Question: Polydectes was one popular nickname for this Greek god who in one story transformed the nymph Leuce into a white poplar tree. This God's wife also transformed his mistress Minthe into a mint plant. Pirithous got trapped in this figure's seat for eternity after he and Theseus attempted to kidnap this god's wife, whom he had married after giving her a pomegranate. Orpheus once traveled into this man's kingdom, which includes the Asphodel Meadows and Elysium, in a failed attempt to recover his wife Eurydice. Cerberus guards the domain of this man, who in one story abducted Demeter's daughter Persephone. For 10 points, name this Greek god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Hades

Result: 1629 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: UCSD.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 7077

Question: This figure presented beef hidden in an ox's stomach and bull's bones coated in glistening fat for a sacrifice which set the precedent for future sacrifices. This figure was either the son of Themis, or the brother of Atlas and Menoetius and son of Iapetus. This figure's actions, which included molding humanity out of clay, caused Hephaestus to fashion the woman Pandora, his sister-in-law. Hercules freed him from Mount Caucasus, where he was having his liver eaten by a vulture and regenerated an infinite number of times. For 10 points, name this Titan whom Zeus bound to a rock for giving fire to humanity.

ANSWER: Prometheus

Result: 1630 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: VCU.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 7120

Question: One god of this domain has four minor gods named after himself, one each for the cardinal directions. One figure got this from the Milky Way, which he kept in a jug; that was the Incan Ilyap'a. One figure who controlled this became associated with Atonatiuh and lived on his mountain with Chal

ANSWER: rain gods [accept thunder gods; prompt on "weather" until mentioned]

Result: 1631 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: Yale A.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 7129

Question: Sterope and Aithops were two of these animals which ended up nightly in a golden cup. The Celtic goddess Epona took this form. The kings of Troy owned twelve of these, which were promised to Heracles for rescuing Hesione. A race of hybrids with the rears of these animals was spawned when Ixion raped the cloud nymph Nephele. Eurystheus commanded Heracles to fetch man-eating examples of these animals which belonged to Diomedes. One animal of this type was born from the neck of Medusa and tamed by Bellerophon, and had wings. For 10 points, name these creatures which included Pegasus and whose form made up the bottom half of centaurs.

ANSWER: horses [or mares]

Result: 1632 | ACF Fall | 2010 | Round: Yale B and Washington.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 7155

Question: One son of this god was a charioteer of King Oenomaus who removed the pins from his master's chariot, allowing Pelops to win the hand of Hippodamia and was named Myrtilus. This god was called "thrice-great," or Trismegistus, when worshipped as an analogue of the Egyptian Thoth. This deity was born on Mt. Cyllene to Maia. He killed the hundred-eyed Argos, and his namesake son with Aphrodite was seduced by and merged with Salmacis. He also fathered Pan, created the first lyre, and had winged sandals. For 10 points, name this caduceus-wielding messenger god, the Greek analog of Mercury.

ANSWER: Hermes [accept Mercury until mentioned]

Result: 1633 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Carleton UCLA - Final.docx | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 7183

Question: One individual commonly cited as a daughter of this figure was the spirit of Excuse, Prophasis, while a Corinthian nymph who was either the daughter or wife of this figure was Ephyra. This figure's daughter was the mother of Protogeneia, Thyia, and the king Hellen, and that daughter previously consulted the oracle at Themis with her husband, the last Bronze Age man, about how to repopulate the human race. This figure's agreement with his brother that the latter would inspect this figure's handiwork eventually resulted in that brother's theft of a fennel-stalk from heaven. That theft led to the creation of this son of Iapetus's wife, who would later bear him Pyrrha; he eventually accepted that clay wife from Hermes despite being warned not to by Zeus. For 10 points, name this creator of animals in Greek mythology and husband of Pandora, the foolish brother of Prometheus.

ANSWER: Epimetheus

Result: 1634 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Chicago A - Final.docx | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 7200

Question: Warning: Greek or Roman version acceptable. According to Pausanias, inquirers at the oracle of Trophonius in Lebadeia had to spend several days in a house sacred to the 'Agathos Daimon' and the Greek version of this deity, who was said to be an Oceanid in Hesiod's Theogony. Like Demeter, she was sometimes depicted carrying a cornucopia or the Ploutos child. As a patron goddess of various cities she was depicted wearing mural crowns shaped like each city's battlements, and she was often shown carrying a rudder or a ball. The Roman version of this goddess was associated with Bonus Eventus, while the Greek version was associated with Nemesis, who provided a counterbalance to her favors. At her temple at Argos, the hero Palamedes supposedly dedicated the first-ever pair of dice. FTP, name this goddess of luck whose Roman equivalent is invoked in a section of the Carmina Burana.

ANSWER: Tyche or Fortuna

Result: 1635 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Chicago A - Final.docx | Question: 25 | Mythology | ID: 7213

Question: In Aztec myth this position is held by a deity who is also associated with feasts and gaming, the little black god Ixtlilton, while in Phoenician myth this role is filled by Sidon's tutelary deity Eshmun. In Shinto myth a god of sorcery and farming named Okuninushi also fills this role, and in Hindu myth Saranyu's sons are divine horsemen who hold this position. Those gods are all patrons of an activity associated with a magical pigskin retrieved by the sons of Tuireann. In Greek myth this position is primarily filled by a god whose sons Podalirius and Machaon served the Greek army at Troy, and among the Tuatha De Danann this is the role of Dian Cecht. The Ashvin twins and Imhotep hold, for 10 points, what position also held by Apollo's son by Coronis, the god Asclepius?

ANSWER: god or patron deity (or whatever) of healing or medicine or doctoring or equivalents

Result: 1636 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round (Finals 1).docx | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 7215

Question: In Hindu tradition, the goddess Sitala was ejected from Shiva's paradise of Kailasa for throwing one of these at Shiva and giving him ulcers. Members of spiritual houses in Umbanda tradition are given one of these called an ileke, which are each associated with certain orishas. Another one of these was stolen by the tyrant Phayllus during the Sacred Wars, after it had been sent away to a shrine by the sons of king Phegeus. Earlier, that example of one of these objects had persuaded Eriphyle to betray her husband Amphiaraus, after it had been given to her by Polynices. Another example of one of these was obtained by sleeping with four dwarves on consecutive nights. For 10 points, name these objects which include the Brisingamen possessed by Freya and the cursed one of Harmonia.

ANSWER: necklaces (accept bracelet until Eriphyle)

Result: 1637 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round (Finals 2).docx | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 7244

Question: One story about this deity says that his wife became enraged when accused of infidelity and locked herself in a burning hut, declaring that only their true children would be born, and miraculously three children emerged from the fire - two of those kids notably held a talent for fishing and hunting, which they decided to switch with each other. This deity married that wife only after rejecting her sister, the rock deity Ihanaga, who cursed him and declared that his marriage to the flower goddess Kono-hana explains why human lives are so fragile. This deity landed on and built his palace, after which he convinced O-kuni-nushi to let him rule the country - he had descended from his heavenly rock carrying the Eight-Handed Mirror, the Yakasani jewel, and Kusanagi. For 10 points, name this grandfather of Jimmu, who brought the three sacred treasures to Japan on the orders of Amaterasu.

ANSWER: Ninigi-no-Makoto

Result: 1638 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round (PO 1).docx | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 7265

Question: This god is mentioned on a votive stela on which Neferabu admits making a false oath in his name and losing his sight as a result, and begs for forgiveness. He is sometimes syncretized with the earth god Tatenen, and common epithets refer to him as "under the moringa tree" and as "Lord of Ankh-tawy." He's also worshipped in hyphenated form with the mortuary deity Sokar. This god's son Nefertem appeared late as a member of his triad, and is sometimes said to have helped him create the world by thought and imagination. This god of craftsmen is most traditionally worshipped with his wife Sekhmet. For 10 points, name this predominant creator god of Memphis.

ANSWER: Ptah

Result: 1639 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round (PO 2).docx | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 7279

Question: Each of them is associated with a symbol known as a veve and their appearance causes a namesake "crisis," which is marked by a state of utter exhaustion when these entities enter a govi and are said to "mount a horse." These entities include Dinclinsin, who holds a whip and is renowned for his cruelty, while Limba is said to dwell in rocks and eat everyone he encounters. They are said to be "served with both hands" when invoked by a bokor under certain conditions, or by a traditional houngan. They are divided into families including the Ghede, the Petro, and the Rada. For 10 points, name these entities exemplified by figures like Baron Samedi and Papa Legba, who serve as deities that possess Voodoo priests.

ANSWER: loas

Result: 1640 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round (PO 2).docx | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 7293

Question: As a gift, this figure is given a mixing bowl obtained from the king of the Sidonians, Phaedimus, and forged by Hephaestus. According to one fragment, he was bathed by a maiden named Polycaste and thus become the father of . This older brother of Acusilaus gets visited by a figure introduced as a king of the Taphians who claims to be bringing a cargo of iron to Temesa. Later, this figure receives a chariot and horses driven by Pisistratus, after he had asked for twelve jars of wine and twenty measures of barley from Euryclea. Much earlier, he was placed in front of a plow by Palamedes, in order to expose the fake insanity of his father. He futilely attempts to expel Eurymachus and Antinous from his house before setting on the above journey to talk to Menelaus and Nestor. For 10 points, name this son of Penelope who searches for his father in the Odyssey.

ANSWER: Telemachus

Result: 1641 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round (PO 3).docx | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 7307

Question: According to some myths, the expulsion of this mythological figure's brother led to the establishment of a people named the Termiloi. This figure's grandchildren include Apemosyne who was killed by her brother Althamenes. The murder of this figure's son caused a war with a man rendered invulnerable by a purple lock of hair on his head. That conflict with the Megaran King Nisos was ultimately resolved by the seduction of Scylla. Drowned in a bath given to him by the daughters of King Cocalus, this figure's lovers included the boy Miletos. This father of Androgeos and brother of Rhadamanthus next made war on Aegeus, but was cuckolded when a certain inventor built his wife a heifer out of wood and made love to Poseidon's bull. For 10 points, identify this royal husband of Pasiphae for whom Deaedalus built a labyrinth on the island of Crete.

ANSWER: King Minos

Result: 1642 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round (PO 4).docx | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 7330

Question: A key relationship in the life of this figure mirrors that of Hadingus and Regnhild. This figure is present at Aegir's feast and interjects during Heimdall's argument to predict that another deity will soon be bound with the entrails of his son. The Norse analogue of Ull, according to some stories this deity lived at Manheim and fathered the ancestors of the Hladir Jarls with Odin. Numerous sources assert that it is this deity, who had earlier been made to laugh by an encounter with a goat, who provides the serpent that drips venom on Loki's head. This figure, who is loath to leave her family abode, Thrymheim, and was often depicted wearing snow-shoes was the daughter of Thiazi. For 10 points, identify this Goddess who selected her husband on the basis of his beautiful feet and thus became the unwilling mistress of Noatun and the consort of Njord.

ANSWER: Skadi or Shathi

Result: 1643 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round (PO 5).docx | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 7357

Question: Seven sons of this figure were renamed Maine in order to satisfy the misleading prophecy of a druid, while this figure's daughter Findabair was promised in marriage to Fraech in return for a battle pledge, though his death caused Findabair to die of grief. One story says that this figure died while bathing after being hit on the head by a hunk of cheese slung by Furbaide, who was avenging the death of his mother Eithni at the hands of this figure. This figure shares her name with the Celtic goddess of intoxication, and it was said that she could only be sexually satisfied by Fergus mac Roich, though her most famous partner was Ailill. Perhaps most famously, she grows jealous over Aillil's possession of Finnbennach, which starts the Cattle Raid of Cooley. For 10 points, name this Queen of Connaught.

ANSWER: Medb (or Queen Maeve, Maev, Maive, Meadbh, etc.)

Result: 1644 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round 1 (RR).docx | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 7377

Question: In one fragmentary poem, this mythological figure is said to have fractured the shield of Fair Cei. Another source says that this figure was birthed under the Black Stone at Llanfair in Arfon, after the mother of this figure had been chased across the country by Coll ap Collfrewy. That source calls this figure one of the "three great oppressions of Mon" and says that its mother Henwen bore a great womb-burden. The prior poem declares that ninescore warriors fell just to make food for this creature, which now roams the Isle of Anglesey after it had swam across the straits of Menai. For 10 points, name this gigantic "clawing" creature in Welsh mythology, named after the man whose sons adopted it.

ANSWER: Palug's Cat (or Cath Palug, or any indication of a feline and Palug)

Result: 1645 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round 2 (RR).docx | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 7394

Question: An alternate name for this figure is Dipaka, which means "little lamp." In one story about him, during the month of Caitra, his remains were put in cuckoos and black insects among other things. In that story, as related in the Matsya Purana, he claims that krodha follows dvesa and that irsya destroys dhairya. In that same story he was accompanied by Madhu and is called to awaken another god from his meditation following the attacks of the demon Taraka. He is eventually reincarnated as Pradyumna, the son of Rukmini, after having been exposed to Madana, which made him "bodiless," and gave him the epithet Ananga. His banner is marked by the large fish Makara and this deity sometimes rides a parrot. For 10 points, name this husband of Rati, the Hindu god of love.

ANSWER: Kama or Kamadeva (accept early buzz of Ananga or Pradyumna before they are mentioned.)

Result: 1646 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Editor's Round Tiebreak 2.docx | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 7443

Question: One figure by this name was given a shield by Ragnar Lodbrok decorated with four scenes, including Thor's fishing of the Midgard Serpent. In the Lokasenna, this figure offers an arm-ring, a sword, and a horse as a gesture of peace, but Loki responds that he can't have these items because he's such a coward in battle, which prompts this figure to shout that he'd decapitate Loki if they were not in Aegir's hall. Often referred to as "long-bearded," this figure along with Hermod is said to welcome the king Hakon the Good at . Slain kings are honored by drinking from a cup named after this figure, and this husband of Idun was said to have a tongue carved with runes. For 10 points, name this most gifted poet in Norse myth.

ANSWER: Bragi (accept Bragi Boddason the Old before arm-ring)

Result: 1647 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Harvard - Final.docx | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 7463

Question: In one story, a goddess was persuaded by a fox to sleep with this figure, and she subsequently fathered eight gods who could cure eight different body parts. This deity was sometimes known as the "Lord of semen," and in one story his semen caused seven different types of plants to sprout from the earth. This figure asked a sun god to make footprints in the ground so that he could fill them with water, giving life to a barren island called Dilmun. This figure saved humanity by warning Atrahasis of a coming flood and, in another story, the misfortunes of humans were a result of a contest between this figure and Ninhursag. This figure causes a confusion of tongues in a speech to Enmerkar, and he was sometimes represented as half-goat and half-fish. Commonly called the "Lord of Abzu," this figure ruled from the city of Eridu and in one story was seduced by the goddess Inanna. For 10 points, identify this Sumerian deity of knowledge, fertility, and water, who was later identified with the Babylonian Ea.

ANSWER: Enki [accept Ea early]

Result: 1648 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: MD A Illinois B - Final.docx | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 7477

Question: In some descriptions, the right eye of this deity is replaced with a mass of thick, black hair or a blob of excrement representing the sins of man. This deity punishes women who sew too frequently in the winter or who are dirty. Her realm is a limbo-like place where men's souls wait to travel to the Land of the Moon; it features ever-turning wheels of ice and is known as Adlivun. This deity can cause great famine by locking up all animals hunted for food, and this famine can only be stopped by traveling to this deity's home and combing her hair. This goddess's ravenous hunger as a child once caused her to eat her father's arm while he was sleeping, causing him to try to drown her. During this attempt, he cut off her fingers, which fell into the sea to create the animals with which she is associated. For 10 points, name this Inuit goddess of whales, seals and other aquatic mammals.

ANSWER: Sedna

Result: 1649 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: MN A Chicago B - Final.docx | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 7529

Question: In the proto-Indo-European dialogue "The King and the God", the title king is told to pray to this figure in order to receive a child. The Sindhi festival of Cheti Chand is held in honor of the birth of Jhulelal, a reincarnation of this deity. This guardian of the west shares his mount with the goddess Ganga and is generally depicted as part-alligator or part-dolphin. This figure is known to wield a snake as a lasso, and, along with his brother Mitra, he is considered a god of rta and oaths. In the Ramayana, Rama angrily attempts to destroy the oceans when this god fails to respond to his prayers after three days. For 10 points, identify this chief of the Adityas who watches over the world with his thousand eyes, a Vedic deity of the sea.

ANSWER: Varuna [or Waruna; prompt on Jhulelal before mentioned]

Result: 1650 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Rutgers Yale - Final.docx | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 7570

Question: In an account of Plutarch, this deity's infidelity is discovered when a garland is accidentally left behind by her lover. In one story, this figure, disguised as a dancer, is dispatched by Ra, along with Khnum, Isis, Heqet, and Meshkhenet in order to help Rededdet give birth to three kings, and in another story, this figure along with Serqet convinces Isis to summon Ra's help when Horus is stabbed by a scorpion. This deity is frequently depicted wearing a basket, which is also the hieroglyph representing her name, "lady of the house." Her brother inadvertently impregnated her with a child she later abandoned; that child, Anubis, was born when this youngest daughter of Geb and Nut had sex with Osiris. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the sister of Isis and wife of Set.

ANSWER: Nephthys [or Nebet-het or Nebthet]

Result: 1651 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: Stanford - Final.docx | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 7588

Question: The Ashanti performed human sacrifices to placate one of these figures named Katarwiri, who was married to one of these named Tando. In ancient China, young girls were sacrificed to one of these named He Bo. One of these figures was the father of Teucer, the first king of the Trojans; that one was only prevented from killing Achilles after Hephaestus started a fire. Another of them founded the city of Argos, and was the father of Io. In addition to Xanthus and Inachus, gods of this sort include Peneus, the father of Daphne, and a deity who assisted Aeneas named Tiberinus. For 10 points, identify this class of gods associated with bodies of running water.

ANSWER: river gods [accept clear knowledge equivalents; prompt on "god" or similar answer]

Result: 1652 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: UCSD - Final.docx | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 7614

Question: One of her daughters caused Orchamus to bury Leucothoe alive; that daughter, Clytia, was the lover of Helius. This goddess is referred to as a "nurse" during the Callisto and Arcas story, where she uses her powers to make their constellations never dip below the horizon and forever circle the sky. In the "Deception of Zeus" section of Book XIV of the Iliad, Hera states that she will visit this goddess and her husband, but instead she makes love to Zeus in a golden cloud. In a rare depiction of this goddess, she bears a golden rudder on her shoulder and wings sprout from her forehead. This godmother of Hera is the mother of the pursuer of Arethusa as well as the mother of Metis and Merope. Credited with birthing all of the important rivers of Greek mythology, for 10 points, name this Titaness, the wife of Oceanus.

ANSWER: Tethys

Result: 1653 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: USC CMU - Final.docx | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 7634

Question: This figure consoled a friend by calling him one of the Three Ungrasping Chieftains before inviting that friend to visit his domain.

ANSWER: Pryderi

Result: 1654 | ACF Nationals | 2010 | Round: VCU - Final.docx | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 7657

Question: According to one legend, a statue of this figure makes a sound like a broken harp string when it is struck by the first rays of the sun. He had a brother named Emathion who was killed by Heracles. After his death, this figure's ashes from his funeral pyre were transformed into two flocks of birds which fought each other. He attacked Nestor when that king's chariot was stopped by the arrows of Paris, and ended up killing his son Antilochus. After killing Antilochus, this man managed to wound Achilles in the arm before being killed by him. His death is often given as the reason for the dew, as it caused by the ceaseless tears of his mother. This son of Eos and Tithonus conquered Egypt en route to bringing a huge army to reinforce Troy. For 10 points, name this king of Ethiopia who fought against the Greeks during the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Memnon

Result: 1655 | ACF Novice | 2010 | Round: Early Autumn Collegiate Novice - Packet 1.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 7683

Question: This deity committed a crime witnessed by the shepherd Battus, whom this god turned to stone. He fathered the goddess of fortune, Tyche. He rescued Io by defeating the one hundred-eyed Argus. Odysseus was immune to Circe's spells because this god gave him the herb moly. This son of Maia stole several of Apollo's cattle, one of which he killed to fashion the first lyre. This god gave Perseus some magic items and told him where the Gray Sisters lived. This god owns the caduceus and some winged sandals. For 10 points, name this Greek messenger deity.

ANSWER: Hermes [accept Mercury before "Greek"]

Result: 1656 | ACF Novice | 2010 | Round: Early Autumn Collegiate Novice - Packet 10.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 7696

Question: Hephaestus' unsuccessful attempt to rape this goddess led to the birth of Erichthonius. This goddess casted the deciding vote at Orestes' trial. She won a contest judged by Cecrops by creating the olive tree. In the Odyssey, she forces Calypso to release the imprisoned Odysseus and aids Telemachus. This daughter of Metis defeated Arachne in a weaving contest. She was born by emerging, fully formed, from the head of Zeus. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of wisdom, the counterpart of the Roman Minerva and patron deity and namesake of Athens.

ANSWER: Athena [or Pallas Athena; or Minerva before stated]

Result: 1657 | ACF Novice | 2010 | Round: Early Autumn Collegiate Novice - Packet 2.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 7725

Question: In one story, this god competes against fire in an eating contest that was rigged by a similarly named figure "of the Outyards." He takes the form of a mare in order to prevent the completion of a wall, which causes him to get pregnant and give birth to an eight-legged horse. He impersonates a giantess and refuses to weep for Balder's death, which he had previously caused by telling the blind god Hoder throw some mistletoe. By the giantess Angrboda, he fathered the giant serpent Jormungand and the wolf Fenrir. For 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 1658 | ACF Novice | 2010 | Round: Early Autumn Collegiate Novice - Packet 3.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 7745

Question: When this deity assumes his role as the god of wind, he is depicted with a conical hat and a mask with two protruding tubes. In one story, he immolated himself after being tricked into sleeping with a priestess by a rival deity. In order to begin the fifth world cycle, he traveled into the underworld with his dog-headed psychopomp brother. This nemesis of the jaguar-faced god of the "smoking mirror" is typically depicted as a warrior or a feathered serpent. For 10 points, name this rival of Tezcatlipoca, an Aztec sky god who Montezuma allegedly confused with Hernan Cortes.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl [prompt on Ehecatl]

Result: 1659 | ACF Novice | 2010 | Round: Early Autumn Collegiate Novice - Packet 4.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 7762

Question: This figure hid among King Onkios's horses before Poseidon discovered her and sired Despoina with her. She tried to make Demophon immortal, but was thwarted when his mother saw him burning. She turned Lyncus into a lynx after he tried to kill her priest Triptolemus. Along with her daughter, who ate several pomegranate seeds in the underworld, she is the focus of the Eleusinian Mysteries. Her daughter spends four months of each year with Hades, causing this goddess to bring winter. For 10 points, name this mother of Persephone, the Greek goddess of the harvest.

ANSWER: Demeter [accept Ceres before "Greek"]

Result: 1660 | ACF Novice | 2010 | Round: Early Autumn Collegiate Novice - Packet 5.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 7781

Question: One of these figures was created from a mirror made of white copper. Another of them pulled a "grass-cutting" sword from a dragon's tail, and then gave the weapon to his sister as a gift after he threw a flayed horse into her temple. One of these figures, who represents the sun, had to be lured from a cave by a lurid dance. Raijin is the one of these figures who represents storms. Izanagi and Izanami were two of these figures whose union produced the island of Honshu. For 10 points, name these figures that include Susano'o and Amaterasu, the gods of Shinto myth.

ANSWER: kami [or Shinto gods or equivalents before "Shinto"]

Result: 1661 | ACF Novice | 2010 | Round: Early Autumn Collegiate Novice - Packet 6.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 7798

Question: One story in this country's mythology sees a figure plow a field of snakes and catch a giant fish before he is allowed to marry his bride. Eggshells broken on Ilmatar's knee gave rise to the universe in this nation's mythology, which includes a northland called Pohjola and an underworld called Tuonela. In a myth from this country, the smith Ilmarinen creates the sampo for Louhi. Heroes in this country's mythos include Vainamoinen and Lemminkainen. Its national epic was compiled by Elias Lonnrot. For 10 points, name this nation whose national epic is the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Republic of Finland [or Finnish mythology; or Suomi; prompt on Kalevala before mentioned]

Result: 1662 | ACF Novice | 2010 | Round: Early Autumn Collegiate Novice - Packet 7.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 7820

Question: In one story, this man slays a rape-happy giant on the island of Mont Saint Michel before defeating Emperor Lucius. This man was mortally wounded at a clash that began when a soldier killed an asp with his sword, the Battle of Camlann. He is conceived when his father sleeps with Igraine while disguised as Gorlois. After his fight with Mordred, this figure goes to Avalon to heal his wounds. This son of Uther Pendragon is married to Guinevere and employs Lancelot. For 10 points, name this man who pulled Excalibur from a stone and ruled from Camelot.

ANSWER: King Arthur

Result: 1663 | ACF Novice | 2010 | Round: Early Autumn Collegiate Novice - Packet 9.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 7868

Question: In one point of the work named for this figure, he is shown seven loaves of bread in different states, which proves that he failed to stay awake for seven days. This figure finds a plant that is "like a boxthorn," which is eaten by a snake. After his friend goes to the "house of dust," this figure seeks out immortality from Utnapishtim. Ishtar sends the Bull of Heaven to kill this figure. This two-thirds divine figure slew Humbaba with the help of his friend, Enkidu. For 10 points, name this king of Uruk, the subject of an epic in Mesopotamian mythology.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 1664 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Brown + VCU + Oklahoma.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 7884

Question: In one story, this figure descended from heaven on a rope of cobwebs and transformed into an ocelot. He sent his servants Water Woman, Water Monster, and Cane and Conch to assist Wind in bringing music to the world from the house of the sun. He created a race of giant acorn-eating people and lost his left foot while battling Cipactli. As the first sun, he was knocked out of the sky by his rival, but this figure turned into a Jaguar and in turn ate the second sun. He wears obsidian sandals to show his connection with matter. For 10 points, name this rival of Quetzalcoatl, the Aztec god of night, who possesses a smoking mirror.

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca

Result: 1665 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Chicago A + UCLA.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 7906

Question: One of the most famous cult practices associated with this deity involves a ritual called the arkteia which involves the imitation of bears. This rite was practiced at Brauron in Attica, a sacred site which Iphigenia was said to have established to placate this deity. The cult of Orthia was also associated with this deity and included the diamastigosis, the ritual whipping of youths as they attempted to steal cheese from an altar. This goddess also came to be associated with the lover of Endymion, the titaness Selene. She is also credited with slaying the twelve grandchildren of Tantalus after Niobe boasted of her children's beauty, and shooting arrows that caused the death of women in childbirth. For 10 points, name this daughter of Leto and sister of Apollo, the Greek goddess of the hunt.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 1666 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - CMU+Harvard.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 7930

Question: According to Apollodorus, Zeus hurled the goddess Ate from Olympus and she landed at this place. One early ruler of this place had three thousand horses who could run on the top of wheat stalks, and an early queen of this place was named Batea. It's not Thebes, but the founder of this place followed a cow until it sat down, and one future ruler of this place was named Podarces. One member of its royal house was abducted by Zeus to become the cupbearer of the gods, and sea monster was sent to this city to devour Hesione because one ruler of this place cheated Apollo and Poseidon after they helped built its walls. In addition to Ganymede and Laomedon, early kings of this place included Dardanus and Ilus, and this city was home to the Palladium. For 10 points, identify this city whose final residents included Hecuba, Hector, and king Priam.

ANSWER: Troy

Result: 1667 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Editors 1.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 7941

Question: In ancient art, this figure is often accompanied by spirits called the Karpoi. This figure causes the death of Amphairos by opening up a chasm into which he falls. One myth about this figure depicts Athena taking care of one of her children. That child resulted from a piece of wool covered in Hephaestus' semen and was named Erechthonius.

ANSWER: Gaea

Result: 1668 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Editors 2.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 7970

Question: One story about this character divides him into three versions, one of which is a trickster god given the epithet "dragonfly". In another version of this figure's myth, he is identified as Ti'iti'i, the son of Talaga. In yet another version of this figure's mythology, he was busy at a marae and unwilling to let the sun go down, so he simply stopped it by holding its rays. That story is also adapted into one in which he stops the sun with a lasso made out of his sister's pubic hair. In a more well-known story, he meets and marries his wife Hina after using a fishhook to pull up several coral islands from the bottom of the ocean. For 10 points, name this god who also fought the sun with a jawbone, a Polynesian god who also names a large Hawaiian island.

ANSWER: Maui

Result: 1669 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Editors 3.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 7996

Question: This figure once carried off a nymph named Leuke, who metamorphosed into a white poplar, becoming sacred to this god. This figure employs a doorman named Aiakos to hold the golden keys that unlocked the door to his palace, and he is in charge of the Oneroi, who bring dreams. This god was also involved in a love affair with Menthe, who became mint. Often depicted with a staff with a bird on the tip, this god is assisted in one of his tasks by men like Rhadymanthys and Minos. In order to help him slay the Medusa, this god lends Perseus his invisibility helmet. In a more famous myth, a pomegranate from this God's orchard ensures that his wife will have to return to him every year; that wife is Persephone. For 10 points, name this brother of Poseidon and Zeus, the Greek god of the dead.

ANSWER: Hades [or Aidoneus]

Result: 1670 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Illinois A + USC.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 8014

Question: Pundalik sets out a brick for this god to sit on in the guise of Vithoba after he locates his wife. Indradyumna asked Vishvakarma to make a limbless log statue of this god. He married the sixteen thousand one hundred maiden captives of Narakasura, adding to a list of wives which included Jambavati. After being raised by Yasoda and Nanda he killed his uncle Kamsa, while his siblings include Subhadra and Balarama. Jayadeva's Gita Govinda recounts his affairs with Radha and the gopis. This god gives his army to Duryodhana though he serves as charioteer to Arjuna, his conversational partner in the Bhagavad Gita. For 10 points, name this Hindu deity, usually depicted with blue skin.

ANSWER: Krishna

Result: 1671 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Michigan + Penn.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 8035

Question: This figure was the protector

ANSWER: Isis

Result: 1672 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Minnesota B + Dartmouth A + Miami C.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 8074

Question: After a pitched battle, this figure slew the king of Caenina, Acron. This figure had a bodyguard named Celer who formed a posse called the Celeres who, as a group, guarded this figure. Also the creator of the Curitia, one story of his death has him disappear in a great storm, never to be seen again, although other sources have him rent limb from limb in a government building. This son of Rhea Silvia was fed by the woodpecker Picus during his infancy, a time at which he was also suckled by Lupa. Later deified as Quirius, this figure killed his brother after that brother lept over a wall to mock him. For 10 points, name this twin brother of Remus, for whom the capital of Italy is named.

ANSWER: Romulus

Result: 1673 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Rice + Claremont.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 8085

Question: This deity once hid a gardener who worked for him after that gardener raped one goddess while she was sleeping, but later revealed him when that goddess sought justice more calmly. This god rescued that same goddess from the underworld by sending beings made from dirt underneath his fingernails. That goddess later stole knowledge from this deity and his city while he was drunk. In one story, after consuming plants created from his own semen by his wife, he becomes pregnant with seven children, who his wife has to take from him. He also saved Atrahasis, and thus, humanity, by delivering a message to the walls of his hut when Enlil decided to destroy the Earth with a flood. For 10 points, identify this Sumerian deity associated with the city of Eridu, a water-god who taught humans about medicine and irrigation.

ANSWER: Enki [or Ea]

Result: 1674 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - RPI A + Illinois B + Waterloo.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 8117

Question: One symbol associated with this deity was originally worn on the head of the first wife of Amun, the goddess Wasret; that symbol is a dried bull's penis known as the Was. Another myth concerning this god features him eating a fresh head of lettuce every morning, although that lettuce had been contaminated with semen. In one myth, this deity spits into the eye of his chief nemesis after taking up the shape of a black pig, and on another occasion induces him into a homosexual act which results in the creation of the moon god Thoth. He protects Re by repelling the evil snake Apophis with his scepter, and this deity murders his brother Osiris by tricking him into a chest and hurling him into the river. The consort of Nepthys, for 10 points, name this chief Egyptian god of violence and chaos.

ANSWER: Seth [accept Set or Setesh]

Result: 1675 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Stanford.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 8128

Question: Apollo gave Cyparissus one of these creatures, though Cyparissus accidently killed it with a javelin. The Celtic fertility god Cernunnos was associated with these animals, and Finn mac Cumhail falls in love with the goddess Sadb, who was cursed into this form by a magician. Saraswati takes the form of a red one named Rohit, and in the Ramayana, Sita sends Rama to capture a golden version of this animal, which leads to her abduction by Ravana. Dain, Dvalin, Duneyr, and Durathor are the four of them that chew on Yggdrasil's leaves. Another one of these animals was chased for a whole year by Heracles before being captured, and Actaeon's dogs ate him after he was transformed into one of these for seeing Artemis bathing. For 10 points, name this animal sacred to Artemis.

ANSWER: deer [accept stag or other equivalents]

Result: 1676 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - UCSD.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 8144

Question: One son of this god was so good at science that his brothers Macar, Actis, Triopus, and Candalus murdered him. This deity's cult was centered almost exclusively on the island of Rhodes, although the Etruscans worshiped a version of him named Usil. This father of Tenages entrusted some sacred animals to his daughters Lampetia and Phaethusa, who guarded them on Thrinacia. After this god was fired upon, he agreed to cede a golden cup to Heracles. Zeus's destruction of Odysseus's ship was prompted by his men eating the cattle of this deity. Later, this deity anointed his son with a magic oil, but was unable to prevent him from blackening the skin of the Ethiopians by failing to control the horses Pyrios, Aeos, Aethon, and Phlegon. For 10 points, name this chariot-riding father of Phaethon, an early Greek god of the sun.

ANSWER: Helios

Result: 1677 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - UCSD.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 8153

Question: One of these figures lives in rocks by the roadside and eats passersby; that figure is known as Limba. Loko and Ayisan are among the group of these known as the Rada, while a more violent group of them is the Ghede, which includes Kriminel. Two of these figures taken together signify the split between astronomical and astrological learning and are children more ancient than time. Those are the Marassa Jameux. The most famous of these figures delights in dirty jokes and constantly smokes a cigar. That example of these figures has cotton in his nostrils and is dressed in a tuxedo and sunglasses and is the husband of Maman Brigitte known as Baron Samedi. For 10 points, name these spirits worshipped in Voodoo.

ANSWER: loa

Result: 1678 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Yale A + Miami B.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 8165

Question: This entity was said to possess two pigs, one of which was always growing while the other was always roasting. He possessed a certain instrument, that when played. put the seasons in correct order. That instrument, Daurdabla, or the "Four Angled Music", was an oak harp. Some of this man's sons include Bodb Dearg, Cermait, and Brigit. This deity's weapon could kill nine men with one blow, but could return the dead to life with its handle. In order to hide his affair with Boann, he made the sun stand still for nine months, after which his most famous son was born. This god succumbed to wounds inflicted by Cethlenn, the wife of Balor, at the second battle of Magh Turiedh. The possessor of a noted magic cauldron, for 10 points, identify this God and ruler of the Tuatha de Danann whose son was Angus and who is also known as "the good god".

ANSWER: The Dagda

Result: 1679 | ACF Regionals | 2010 | Round: 2010 - ACF Regionals - Yale B + McMaster + Matt Bollinger.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 8191

Question: When this man was a child, he and his mother would chase each other around a tree with thorn branches, each trying to harm the other; later, this man defeated the fire-breathing fairy Aillen. This figure employed the great huntsman Comhrag of the Five Hundred Hounds, the wise Druid Cainnelsciath of the Shining Shield, and the famed musician Cnu Deireoil, the Little Nut. This man's most famous ability was augmented when the daughters of Beag threw a vessel of water onto him. This disciple of Finegas gained that ability after licking his scorched thumb. This man was eventually defeated by Goll MacMorna, who took over the Fianna from him. For 10 points, name this hero from the Ulster Cycle who ate the Salmon of Knowledge.

ANSWER: Fionn

Result: 1680 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - Bellevue + Lawrence.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 8213

Question: An analogue of this character once ate all of the food and drink at Kelliwic, after which he dethroned and beat the queen. One of this figure's sons killed Bors the Younger's brother Lionel; in other stories, two sons of this figure led a Saxon army against the forces of Constantine III. This father of Melehan was born on May Day and is sometimes considered to be a full brother of Agravain and Gaheris and a legitimate son of King Lot. He is more often thought to be a product of unintentional incest between a queen who later had an affair with Lamorak and her half-brother. For 10 points, identify this son of Morgause, a perfidious knight who died at Camlann after mortally wounding King Arthur.

ANSWER: Mordred [accept Modred or Medraut]

Result: 1681 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - Brown + Illinois B.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 8238

Question: This figure's sister eventually took the surname "Perenna" after drowning in the Numicus and becoming a river nymph. In one tale, Iris is able to snip the golden hair of this character after Persephone fails to do so. At one point, King Iarbas of the Gaetulians demanded this character's hand in marriage. Her brother Pygmalion killed her first husband, who was named either Acerbas or Sychaeus, which prompted this woman to flee Tyre. She snubbed one of her lovers by turning away from him in the underworld, which that lover had entered using the Golden Bough. Her sister Anna built the funeral pyre that she eventually threw herself on. For 10 points, name this founding queen of Carthage who killed herself in despair when Aeneas left her.

ANSWER: Dido [or Elissa]

Result: 1682 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - Carleton + Sandy Huang + WUSTL.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 8260

Question: Every eight years at Delphi, a festival known as the Herois was held in this figure's honor. This figure was discovered washing off blood in the river Asopus. Prosymnus guided this figure's son to the entrance to the underworld in the Alcyonian Lake, after which that son rescued this figure and brought her to Olympus, where she became the goddess Thyone. Hera visited this daughter of Cadmus in the guise of an old crone, and managed to provoke such curiosity in this woman that she forced her lover to swear an oath on the River Styx to reveal himself in all his splendor. That revelation led to this woman's death, so her son was born from her lover's thigh. For 10 points, name this mortal lover of Zeus and mother of Dionysus.

ANSWER: Semele

Result: 1683 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - Chicago A + LASA.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 8264

Question: Odin once asked this figure to cast a spell on two groups of twenty-one kings that forced them to fight each other, die, and be reborn eternally. Loki once snuck into this figure's bedroom disguised as a flea, which was necessary because no one could enter without this figure's permission. She was the only figure who could bring Hrungnir more ale to drink until Thor was called to eliminate him. This mother of Hnoss travelled the world in order to find her husband. This owner of the boar Hildisvini also owned a cape of falcon feathers that allowed her to fly and a chariot that was pulled by cats. For 10 points, name this member of the Vanir who slept with four dwarves in order to obtain the necklace Brisingamen, the Norse goddess of love and the sister of Frey.

ANSWER: Freya [or Freyja; do not accept "Frigg" or "Frigga"]

Result: 1684 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - Eden Prairie + Maryland B.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 8302

Question: The Solarljod claims that this figure's eldest daughter is called Radvor and that his youngest is called Kreppvor. Loki insulted this god by saying that the daughters of Hymir relieved themselves in his mouth. This figure's father- in-law once captured Loki as a giant eagle, forcing Loki to lure Idunn into Thrymheim. This figure was exchanged with Hoenir to end the Aesir-Vanir War. The wife of this god was once made to laugh by the efforts of Loki and a female goat. He separated from his wife because she could not get used to living in Noatun due to the screeching of the gulls after she selected this god for his beautiful feet. For 10 points, name this father of Freyr and Freya and husband of Skadi, the Norse god of wealth and seafaring.

ANSWER: glyph1197jord [or glyph1197jor

Result: 1685 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - Florida State + Ohio State.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 8304

Question: In one story, this mythological figure is the grandfather of Delphos, founder of Delphi, through the liaison between Apollo and this figure's daughter Thyia. According to the Catalogue of Women, another grandson of this figure is the Cretan runner Orsilochus, whose father had to promise Poseidon to sacrifice the first thing he saw upon returning from the Trojan War, forcing the son of this figure to sacrifice one of his children. The event with which this father of Idomeneus is most associated came about partly due to Lycaon's sacrifice of his own son to Zeus, an event after which this man's vessel came to rest on Mt. Parnassus. This man repopulated the earth by throwing stones over his shoulder with his wife, Pyrrha. For 10 points, name this Greek survivor of Zeus's flood.

ANSWER: Deucalion

Result: 1686 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - Georgia Tech + Rice.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 8332

Question: A figure who was either the wife or daughter of this god wore a cheetah hide and assisted pharaohs with the cord- stretching ritual for appropriately laying the foundations of temples. One being sometimes said to have been a consort of this deity, Astennu, stood around the lake of fire in Duat with three similar beings. This father or husband of Seshat cheated the moon god Khonsu out of five days of light so that Nut could defy Ra's proscription and give birth to five deities. One of his alternate forms was the god of equilibrium, the baboon A'an. He also spoke the words that created the heavens and Earth at Ra's bidding, and helped Isis find the scattered parts of Osiris. For 10 points, identify this scribe of Ma'at who invented writing, the ibis-headed Egyptian god of Wisdom.

ANSWER: Thoth [accept Djehuti, Tahuti, Zehuti, Techu, Tehu, or Thout; accept Seshat before "this god"]

Result: 1687 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - Hannah and Andy.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 8349

Question: Divination based on the movement of an image of this deity occurred in the sanctuary of Atargatis in Hierapolis Bambyce. This god turned Clytia into a sunflower after that woman betrayed this figure's lover to her father Orchamus. Zephyrus jealously blew a discus thrown by this god into the head of his lover Hyacinthus, killing the latter. This god was forced to serve as Admetus's shepherd after avenging the death of his son Asclepius. His rejection by Cassandra led him to curse that prophetess never to be believed. This god surrendered his stolen cows to Hermes in exchange for the lyre, and he and his twin sister killed the fourteen children of Niobe. For 10 points, identify this son of Zeus and Leto and twin to Artemis, the Greek god of light and music.

ANSWER: Phoebus Apollo

Result: 1688 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - Maryland A + Furman.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 8397

Question: This figure ordered Brian, Iuchar, and Iucharba to seek out a number of weapons, then refused to heal the injuries they incurred, thus avenging his father's death. After slaying Cermait for sleeping with one of his wives, this figure was killed by Cermait's three sons. This figure once claimed to possess all skills at the gate of Tara and later proved his mettle by defeating Oghma in a flagstone-throwing contest. He received the sword Fragarach from his foster father, Mannanan mac Lir. This son of Cian and Ethniu avenged the death of Nuada at the second battle of Magh Tuireadh by blinding and slaying Balor, after which he became the leader of the Tuatha de Danaan. For 10 points, identify this father of Cuchulainn, a Celtic hero considered cognate to the Welsh Lleu Llaw Gyffes.

ANSWER: Lugh [or Lamfhada; Lugaidh; Lonnbeimnech; Lonnansclech; Samhildanach; or mac Ethlenn]

Result: 1689 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - UCSD + Penn.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 8458

Question: This figure is told the story of Rathmore while riding past a lake with Buino and Illan. This character committed suicide by headbutting a rock after being forced to live with the man she hated most in the world. A northerner named Trendhorn lost his eye while spying on this figure, who as a child saw an omen in the form of a raven drinking the blood of a calf. Fiachu, Ardan, and Ainle were among those killed when this figure arrived in Emain Macha, where Eoghan mac Durthacht also killed her lover, a son of Uisneach. Raised by the nurse Leabharcham, she fled to Alba with her lover Naoise but was eventually tracked down by Conchobar mac Nessa. For 10 points, name this Celtic woman whose conflicted love and intense beauty caused many sorrows.

ANSWER: Deirdre of the Sorrows [or Derdriu]

Result: 1690 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - Vanderbilt + Harding.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 8478

Question: The holiday of Zagmuk is sacred to this deity, who is also associated with the celestial object of Nibiru. Sometimes known as King of the Igigi, this figure was once called upon at a feast by Ansar, who gave him the name Asalluhi. "House of the raised head" is the translation of the name of his chief temple, Esagila. This figure tamed a winged dragon called the mushussu, which he then gave to his son Nabu. He is the son of Damkina and a figure who held Mummu with a nose-rope, Ea. He is the grandson of the sky god Anu, who gave him a bag of four winds to play with. For 10 points, name this deity who defeated Kingu and seized the Tablets of Destiny, the Babylonian god of thunderstorms who created human life after defeating Tiamat.

ANSWER: Bel Marduk [accept Amar-utu; Meridug; Merodach; or Mardochaios]

Result: 1691 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - VCU + Duke.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 8499

Question: One son of this deity whacked travelers with an iron club until Theseus killed him. This father of Periphetes was also the father of a firebreathing monster killed by Hercules named Cacus. The blinded Orion was guided to the East by this deity's follower Cedalion. This god also gave Harmonia her famous necklace upon her marriage to Cadmus. One son of this god was placed in a box and given to the daughters of Cecrops; that son of this god was born when Athena wiped this god's seed off her thigh and onto the ground. This father of Erecthonius caught his wife sleeping with Ares by constructing a net. He once fell from Olympus for nine days, resulting in his becoming lame. For 10 points, name this wife of Aphrodite and son of Hera and Zeus, the Greek god of the forge.

ANSWER: Hephaestus [or Hephaistos; accept Vulcan until "Greek"]

Result: 1692 | ACF Winter | 2010 | Round: ACF Winter 2010 - zFINALS PACKET 2.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 8532

Question: One character resurrects a dead volva in order to help cure this figure's nightmares in the Vegtamskvida, a poem also known as this character's "dreams." His hall is said to lie in the place of the "fewest baneful runes." The wolf-riding giantess Hyrrokkin was once asked to launch this character's ship. The son of this resident of Breidablik lived in Glitnir, from which he settled disputes. The giantess Thokk refused Hermod's pleas to weep for this owner of Breidablik, which resulted in Loki being bound in a cave until Ragnarok. This owner of Hringhorni was the husband of Nanna and Forseti, and he was eventually avenged by his half-brother Vali. For 10 points, identify this son of Odin who was accidentally killed by his brother Hodr, the most beautiful of the Aesir.

ANSWER: Balder [or Baldr or Baldur; accept Vegtamskvida or Baldrs draumar or equivalents until "this figure"]

Result: 1693 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 02 - Great Unaffected Vampires.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 8584

Question: In Japanese myth, the hero Yakato-takeru is given the sword Kusanagi and one of these objects by his aunt, and with the help of this object overcomes the king of Sagamu. In Chinese myth, Shennong, who had a crystal stomach, was said to possess two of these objects for two different types of herbs. In Russian folklore, a man named Ivan the Soldier was able to obtain a magical object of this type after trapping three demons in his knapsack; that object would provide him with anything he wanted, and Ivan also used this object to trap Death. Along with winged sandals and the helmet of invisibility, Perseus received a magic item of this kind from the nymphs. Pwyll employed one of these items to overcome Gwawl, and Perseus used his to carry the head of the Medusa. For ten points, identify this type of common object, one of which belonging to Aeolus contained the winds.

ANSWER: bag

Result: 1694 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 02 - Great Unaffected Vampires.doc | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 8592

Question: This man is able to shatter Hafgan's shield in one blow from his sword, and in another story, this character is able to defeat an opponent by turning him upside down in a magic bag and tying it shut. In a further story, this figure accidentally allows his dogs to eat a stag that another man's pack had killed, leading him to take that man's place as the ruler of the latter's home for a year. During that year, he refused to sleep with

ANSWER: Pwyll

Result: 1695 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 03 - The Inexorable Sadness of Pencils.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 8604

Question: This figure's death was mourned by a sixty-day period during which subjects had to shave their heads and only eat vegetables. Figures similar to this figure which were worshiped in a similar way included Mnevis and Bakh.

ANSWER: Apis

Result: 1696 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 04 - The First Citizens of Contingency.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 8627

Question: This figure knocked out his eldest son for refusing to call for help in the killing of eleven men, and that son later helped him saw his way out of a stone. This man and his nine brothers were all tied to trees, and all of them were eaten by a she-wolf except this man, whose lover put honey inside his mouth, allowing him to bite off the wolf's tongue. He slew two of his nephews after they refused to make bread from meal with something alive in it. He later married the daughter of Eylimi, Hjordis, and shortly afterwardsy met his end fighting against Hunding. Earlier, his sister had disguised herself so she could have a child by him. That union produced his son Sinfjotli, who helped this man kill Siggeir. For 10 points, name this man who drew Gram from the Branstock, the sister of Signy, son of Volsung, and father of Sigurd.

ANSWER: Sigmund

Result: 1697 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 06 - An Orderly Universe of Discoverable Laws.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 8670

Question: The fourteenth Fargard of the Vendidad describes an atonement process after killing one of these sacred animals which involves killing ten-thousand tortoises, land-frogs and corn-carrying ants. In Scottish folklore, there exist kings of these animals that can only be killed by attacking them below their chin and are accompanied by seven black versions of this animal. The inability of this animal to deliver a message at the request of a creator god results in the imperfections of humanity in an Ainu myth. In order to pursue Gwion who had become a salmon, the sorceress, Ceridwen took the form of one of these creatures. The skin of one of these animals was filled and covered with gold at request of Hreidmar. For 10 points, identify this playful river mammal whose name sounds similar to a Norse dwarf slain by Loki while in the form of this animal.

ANSWER: otters

Result: 1698 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 07 - The Way a Ghost Dissolves.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 8685

Question: This deity was worshipped in the festival of Camay, during which offerings were thrown into a river in the hopes that they would find their way to this god. In one story, this god created a race of giants by breathing into large stones, but irritated with the stupidity of his initial creations, broke them and replaced them with human-sized people. In another story, this figure and two sons traveled North, Northeast, and Northwest, named all the plants, and told the humans which were cultivable and edible, after which they departed by crossing the ocean. This god's name meant "Sea Foam," and commoners were not allowed to say it. Sometimes syncretized with the god Pachacamac, the worship of this deity may derive from the worship of Thunupa as practiced by the Aymara. The chief god of the Quechua pantheon, for ten points, name this father of Inti and Inca creator god.

ANSWER: Inca Viracocha

Result: 1699 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 09 - Academicus Anemicus.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 8735

Question: This deity agreed to relinquish control of his realm in exchange for a great hall, special foods cooked on a special fire, and direct access to heaven via a magic boat. One story about this deity describes the advice he offered to an animal that tricked crocodiles into lining up so he could leap from Oki to Inaba. That animal, the White Hare of Oki, promised the princess Yakami to this deity for helping him regenerate his hair with the pollen of cattails, but this deity's 80 brothers killed him by tricking him into thinking a superheated rock was a red boar, causing this deity to take refuge in the underworld. With the "Small Renown Man" Suku-na-biko, this deity helped cure disease and cultivate plants and crops in a certain area. He is more famous for gaining control of that area after tying a certain storm god's hair to the rafters of his house and running off with Suseri-Hime. Also known as "the Great Land Master," for 10 points, identify this son-in-law of Susanowo who was given control of the Izumo Province and that later ceded control of the seen world to Ninigi.

ANSWER: Oh-kuni-nushi or Okuninushi

Result: 1700 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 10 - A Blue Sky Out of the Oresteia.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 8755

Question: One participant in this event died of shame after she discovered her promised sexual favors had prompted the deaths of several hundred men, while another fell despite his rocky skin after being pinned to a river bed by his best friend. One man joined this event after a recently-severed head continued to berate him for his absence, and it was facilitated by a plague sent by a woman in retaliation for being forced to race a chariot while nine months pregnant. The origins of this event lie in a transmogrification-provoking dispute between swineherds, and it was nearly prevented entirely before a prostitution transaction was spoiled by drunken go-betweens. The central figure of this event took a three-day nap that triggered his transformation into a murderous rampaging monster and was at various points distracted by sexual tension with the Morrigan and visitations from his true father, Lugh. The impetus for this event arose from a dispute over comparative wealth that was resolved due to the presence of Finnbhennach in favor of Ailill, prompting the jealousy of Queen Maeve. Fergus mac Roich retired from the field to end the string of single combats that characterized this mythical event. FTP, identify this event that saw the forces of Connacht abduct Donn Cuailnge from Ulster despite the heroism of Cuchulainn, certainly the most famous incident of Bovine theft in Celtic myth.

ANSWER: The Cattle Raid of Cooley [or the Tain Bo Cuailnge; or the Bull Raid of Cooley; accept reasonable equivalents involving cattle larceny]

Result: 1701 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 11 - A Tall Man Executes a Jig.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 8778

Question: This woman is courted by Sir Bromell la Pleche, and on two occasions is helped by Dame Brusen. Called Perevida in Italian and also known as Amite or Heliabel, she lives for a time in the castle of Blyaunt and earlier in a place that Sir Bors calls the Castle Adventurous. She has a showdown with another character, whom she tells off for adultery and who throws her out of the latter's home, after the lover that they share goes mad and leaps out a window. She later finds that man and cures him with the Holy Grail. Earlier, after being rescued from a boiling bath, this daughter of King Pelles is aided by a magic spell that makes her look like Queen Guinevere so that she can sleep with Sir Lancelot. Sharing her name with the Lady of Astolat, this is, for 10 points, what mother of Sir Galahad?

ANSWER: Elaine

Result: 1702 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 12 - This Octopus Exploits Women.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 8788

Question: In book ten of the Aeneid, Aeneas kills and refuses to bury a son of Faunus and this figure named Tarquitus. Her son built the town of Oeta, named for and located on the mountain where she served as a shepherdess. Though she married a son of Oxylus, she was impregnated after taking a god disguised as a turtle into her lap, whereupon that god, Apollo, turned into a serpent and raped her. This wife of Andraemon underwent her best-known experience after picking a red lotus blossom to give to her son Amphissus. Unfortunately, picking the flower caused the tree it was on to tremble and bleed, and the tree's blood turned this figure into a black tree as well.

ANSWER: Dryope

Result: 1703 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 13 - Speculative Hipsters.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 8817

Question: In this section of a larger work, one character introduces himself as Gagnard, and the title character of this work frequently uses the formulation "since on the hall floor you want to try your luck." The last section of this work is in the galdralag meter though most of it, as befits a poem about wisdom, is in the ljodahattr

ANSWER: Vafthrudnismal

Result: 1704 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 14 - The Gorilla Wrestles With The Superman.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 8827

Question: In one form, this deity was a lover of Mami who commanded seven warriors representing the Pleiades called the Sebitti. This figure's father aided him in his most famous quest by giving him seven pairs of demons, and this figure's epithet of Engidudu means "lord who prowls by night." This deity is often identified by a lion sickle and a lion mace, and his form of Erra is a god of plague and war. In one story this deity builds a throne from fine wood for his future wife, and this figure is ordered not to eat with his future wife but eventually he sleeps with her for seven days. This figure was hidden in spring water by Ea to help him hide from Namtar after he returned from Irkalla. For 10 points, identify this wife of Ereshkigal and son of Enlil, the lord of the underworld in Sumerian mythology.

ANSWER: Nergal [accept Erra and Erragal early, accept Engidudu]

Result: 1705 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 16 - Editors 1.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 8868

Question: This figure's name is often translated as ``the lord of what is seen,'' or ``the lord who sees.'' Extensively studied by Marie-Therese de Mallmann, this figure is sometimes represented in the form of Amoghapasa, which depicts him holding a rope, or in the form of Hayagriva, which depicts him with a horse's head. A notable protector of seafarers, this being is worshipped as Kannon in Japan, where pilgrimage circuits to him have 33 stations in recognition of his 33 manifestations, and he is one of the key protectors of Tibet, where the mantra ``Om mane padme hum'' is recited in praise of him. A discussion of this figure's many forms, the dangers he can dispel, and his name appears in the 25th chapter of the Lotus Sutra, while the Flower Garland Sutra identifies his dwelling place as Potalaka Mountain. According to the Pure Land Sutra, this being, along with Mahasthamaprapa, is one of the assistants of the Amitabha Buddha, serving as a kind of psychopomp, and a common depiction of him has him holding a lotus in his left hand. The most popular figure of worship in the Mahayana pantheon, this being is often depicted with eleven heads, a thousand eyes, and a thousand arms. For ten points, identify this Buddhist deity, the bodhisattva of infinite compassion.

ANSWER: Avalokitesvara

Result: 1706 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 16 - Editors 1.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 8876

Question: The employment of one of these objects causes everyone around, including its user, to weep, after which its user promises a beautiful plumage to any bird that can gather his tears from the waters, a task accomplished by the duck. Another instance of this object's use causes warriors to lay down their arms, but that object is lost when the warship on which its owner is sailing is buffeted by winds and waves sweep this object overboard. After losing the first of these objects, its owner commissions an iron rake to look for it at the bottom of the sea, but after failing to find it, creates a second one of these objects from birchwood, using the hair of a virgin for strings.

ANSWER: kantele [accept Vainamoinen's harp or Vainamoinen's zither before mention of that answer part, i.e. you can accept Vainamoinen's harp after "harp" has been mentioned but before "Vainamoinen"; prompt on partial answers]

Result: 1707 | Chicago Open | 2010 | Round: 2010 - Chicago Open - Round 17 - Editors 2.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 8897

Question: One legend about this figure holds that the last thing he did before dying was build a cathedral, after which he turned into a stone that was used to complete the building. Another story about this figure relates that he could not walk until he was 33 years old, at which point his ailment was cured by a group of pilgrims. This figure's horse was able to leap the Black Mire in a single leap, and this figure defeated a half-man-half-bird bandit named the Nightingale. In another incident, this figure rode to a place called the Holy Mountains to test his strength against the giant Sviatogor, who trapped this figure in his pocket. This hero's horse was variously named either Sivushka or Kosmatushka, and the pilgrims who healed him told him never to face Volga Yaroslavich or Mikula Selyaninovich in battle. This man presented himself at the court of Vladimir Bright Sun, where he became a member of a group that also included Dobrynya Nikitich and Alesha Popovich. For ten points, identify this Russian folk hero whose name comes from the city of his birth, the mightiest of the bogatyrs.

ANSWER: Ilya Ivanovich or Ilya Muromets [prompt on partial answer]

Result: 1708 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2010 | Round: CMST_Round01.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 9261

Question: He fulfilled a prophecy by accidentally killing his grandfather Acrisius ("uh-CRIZZ-ee-us") with a discus. Acrisius had imprisoned his mother, Danae ("duh-NAY-ee"), but Zeus visited her as a golden shower. This man borrowed the invisibility cap of Hades, the reflective shield of Athena, and the winged sandals of Hermes. He slew a sea monster that was about to consume Andromeda, whom he made his wife. For 10 points, name this figure who beheaded Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 1709 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2010 | Round: CMST_Round02.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 9280

Question: This man's dog Argus dies atop a refuse heap. He reveals himself to a foot-washing maid, Eurycleia ("your-ee-CLAY-uh"). The Laestrygones ("LAY-strih-GOAN-ees") destroy many ships belonging to his fleet, and he also visits the land of the lotos ("lotus") -eaters. He kills his wife's suitors with the help of his son, Telemachus ("TELL-uh-MOCK-us"), then reunites with that wife, Penelope. For 10 points, an epic by Homer describes what man's twenty-year quest to get home after the Trojan War?

ANSWER: Odysseus [prompt on Ulysses]

Result: 1710 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2010 | Round: CMST_Round02.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 9283

Question: This figure once tried to destroy mankind by tearing out an eye, which turned into Hathor. At night, he brings light to the darkness of the underworld. The disk above this deity's head is called Aton. Apep is depicted in an eternal struggle with this god, whose primary center of worship was at Heliopolis. In the form of Atum, he is the figure who gives light and warmth. For 10 points, name this Egyptian sun deity.

ANSWER: Ra [accept Amon-Ra or Re or Amon-Re; do not accept "Amon" by itself]

Result: 1711 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2010 | Round: CMST_Round03.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 9289

Question: Otus and Ephialtes ("eff-ee-ALL-tees") tried to capture this goddess, but ended up slaying each other after she transformed into a deer. She slew the daughters of Niobe ("ny-OH-bee") in response to a slight against her mother. Actaeon ("ack-TAY-on") caught a glimpse of this deity bathing, for which he was turned into a stag and mauled by his own dogs. For 10 points, name this twin of Apollo, the Greek goddess of the hunt.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 1712 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2010 | Round: CMST_Round04.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 9316

Question: One of this deity's possessions is a ring that creates eight copies of itself every nine nights. This deity learned nine songs and eighteen runes after hanging from the world tree for nine days. Huginn ("HOO- ginn") and Muninn ("MOO-ninn") bring information from the various lands of this deity's pantheon to his throne. Fenrir ("FEN-reer") will kill this deity at Ragnarok ("RAG-nuh-rock"). For 10 points, name this god of poetry and wisdom, the leader of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin

Result: 1713 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2010 | Round: CMST_Round06.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 9346

Question: This brother of Chrysaor ("CRY-say-or") created the Hippocrene ("HIP-oh-creen") fountain. This figure was credited with helping a hero slay the Chimera and was tamed with a special girdle given by Athena to that hero, Bellerophon ("bell-AIR-oh-fon"), in a dream. Eventually employed as Zeus' bolt- carrier, this figure sprang from the neck of Medusa after she was decapitated by Perseus. For 10 points, name this winged horse from Greek myth.

ANSWER: Pegasus

Result: 1714 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2010 | Round: CMST_Round07.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 9359

Question: One deity from this country's myth system obtained the "grass-cutting sword" after defeating an eight- headed foe. Its sun deity hid in a cave after another deity made too much noise. Those deities, Susanowo ("SOO-sun-oh-woe") and Amaterasu ("ah-MAH-ter-AH-soo") respectively, are siblings from this country's myth system. For 10 points, these kami ("KAH-mee") are from the Shinto religion practiced by citizens of what country?

ANSWER: Japan [or Nippon-koku; or Nihon-koku]

Result: 1715 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2010 | Round: CMST_Round08.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 9381

Question: This figure's birth was engineered by Sir Pelles ("PELL-us"), his grandfather. A descendant of Joseph of Arimathea ("AIR-uh-muh-THEE-uh"), this youngest of the Knights of the Round Table died after taking a fated trip to Jerusalem, while accompanied by Sirs Bors and Percival. He is the only figure who is allowed to sit in the Siege Perilous, due to his destiny. The son of Sir Lancelot was, for 10 points, what Arthurian figure who found the Holy Grail?

ANSWER: Sir Galahad

Result: 1716 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2010 | Round: CMST_Round09.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 9411

Question: This figure met his demise when he was struck by a piece of wood from his own vessel. While in Colchis ("COAL-chiss") visiting King Aeetes ("ay-EE-tees"), he accomplished such tasks as yoking fire- breathing oxen and dispatching a group of warriors that sprang forth after dragon teeth were sown into the ground, all to get the Golden Fleece. He was aided in these tasks by his future wife Medea. For 10 points, name this leader of the Argonauts.

ANSWER: Jason

Result: 1717 | Collaborative MS Tournament | 2010 | Round: CMST_Round10.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 9424

Question: This city was founded by Cadmus after following a cow until it sat. This city was besieged by the Sphinx, as all travelers who entered it were forced to either solve its riddle or be eaten. To avenge the sleight done to him by Eteocles("et-TEE-oh-clees"), Polyneices ("polly-NYE-kees") led a group of seven warriors against this city. For 10 points, identify this Greek city, the home of Antigone ("an-TIG-uh-nee") and Oedipus ("EH-dip-us").

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 1718 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 1.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 9436

Question: With a name derived from the Greek for "satchel" or "pack," this mythological figure survived early abandonment after being suckled by a she-bear for five days before being adopted by the shepherd Agelaus. His first wife was the river nymph Oenone, but after leaving her he eventually met Menelaus in combat and was saved from certain death when Aphrodite rescued him by hiding him in a cloud of dust. Eventually killed by a poison arrow shot by Philoctetes, he himself shot the arrow into the heel that killed Achilles. FTP name this Trojan whose selection of Aphrodite as the most beautiful goddess started the Trojan War and earned him Helen as a wife.

ANSWER: Paris

Result: 1719 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 10.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 9460

Question: The Egyptian fertility goddess Heqmet is usually depicted as or with the head of this type of creature. In Greek myth, Leto, after birthing Artemis and Apollo, was forbidden to drink from a lake by some Lycian peasants, whom she turned into these creatures as punishment. In a tale sometimes attributed to Homer, one of these creatures accidentally drowns a mouse it is carrying on its back, leading to a war between the mice and these creatures. FTP what are these amphibians, one of which turns into a handsome prince after being kissed by a princess in a common fairy tale?

ANSWER: frogs (accept toads)

Result: 1720 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 11.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 9480

Question: Spirits associated with varieties of these objects include the Meliai, who tended to Zeus, and the caryatids. Leto gave birth to Apollo and Artemis while holding one of these objects on Delos. One type of this object at Dodona was considered an oracle of Zeus. Dryads were the nymphs of these objects. Philemon and Baucis were transformed into these in Ovid's Metamorphoses, and Daphne was turned into a laurel one as she was fleeing Apollo. For 10 points, name these objects, one of which provided the wood for the Argo.

ANSWER: trees

Result: 1721 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 12.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 9498

Question: One version of this culture's creation myth states that a dragon goddess created the first man and woman from clay. The better-known version suggests that a creator deity first made a race of giants but destroyed them with a flood when they became disobedient. That creator deity, Viracocha, fathered the sun god Inti, whose own son emerged from the cave Pacariqtambo to found this race. That founder was Manco Capac, who is also sometimes said to have risen from Lake Titicaca. FTP in what culture's mythos is Manco said to have established the city of Cuzco?

ANSWER: Inca

Result: 1722 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 13.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 9530

Question: One origin tale for this figure has it that his father was warned that a baby born on May Day would kill him, so he and all other May Day babies were sent away on a ship that sunk, though this figure survived. Depending on the tale, he was born of his father's rape of his mother or because his mother disguised herself as his father's wife. He fulfills the prophecy by killing his father at the Battle of Camlann, though he is also killed. Born variously of Morgause or Morgan le Fay, FTP who is this illegitimate son and slayer of King Arthur?

ANSWER: Mordred or Modred or Merdraut

Result: 1723 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 3.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 9558

Question: The Greek god Hermes, when prevented by Aglaurus from having sex with her sister Herse, caused this to happen to Aglaurus. The dwarf Alvis underwent this action at dawn after competing in a riddle contest with Thor overnight. This metamorphosis occurred to King Polydectes when presented with a gift by a hero he had sent on a quest, and Niobe underwent this transformation after seeing her children killed by Artemis and Apollo. FTP what is this transformation that could be caused by looking directly at Medusa's head?

ANSWER: turned to stone (accept reasonable equivalents involving becoming rock or stone!)

Result: 1724 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 4.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 9578

Question: This mythological figure received a drink from Agnar while being forced to sit between two fires for eight days, and he worked an entire summer for Baugi in order to gain access to a magical substance that was guarded by Gunnlod. Possessions of this brother of Vili and Ve include the goat Heidrun, the wolves Geri and Freki, the eight-legged horse Sleipnir, the spear Gungnir, and the ring Draupnir. This ruler of the Aesir will be swallowed by Fenrir at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this figure from Norse myth, the husband of Frigg, and the father of Thor.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wotan; or Wodan; or Wodin; or Ouvin; or Othin; or Othinus; or Ouvin]

Result: 1725 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 5.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 9612

Question: This deity's minister Ninshubar created two beings, Kurgarru and Kalaturru, to bring the "food of life" and "water of life" to the underworld to restore this deity. Prior to dying there, this deity had been divested of the Shugurra, her royal staff, her necklace, and five other items as she passed through the seven gates of the underworld ruled by her sister, Ereshkigal. Venturing there to find and restore her beloved Tammuz, FTP who was this goddess associated with the planet Venus, the Assyrian and Akkadian goddess of sex and war?

ANSWER: Ishtar (accept an answer of "Inanna" until "Ereshkigal" is read; after that, prompt)

Result: 1726 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 7 (WUSTL).doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 9641

Question: One holiday of this people was Nemontemi, a five day unlucky period at the end of the year in which no work was done. This people's god of war killed his sister after springing out of the womb fully armed after she tried to kill their mother. These people were told to settle where they saw a eagle eating a snake on a cactus by that god, and they fought Flower Wars to capture prisoners to sacrifice to the sun by cutting out their still beating hearts on their temples.. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican people who worshipped gods like Huitzilopochtli and the Feathered Serpent, Quetzalcoatl in Tenochtitlan.

ANSWER: Aztecs

Result: 1727 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 8.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 9665

Question: In his role as the favorite of ascetics, this deity's matted locks are often shown in a coil that represents the Ganges. His collar of serpents is called the naga-kundala, and in one hand he carries Pinaka, his trident. He often rides the bull Nandi, and his neck is permanently stained blue from drinking poison that could've destroyed the world. Often worshipped through his symbol of the lingam, he is sometimes depicted as Nataraja, the eternal dancer. One of the trimurti, FTP identify this cohort of Vishnu and Brahma, considered the destroyer.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 1728 | Delta Burke | 2010 | Round: DB 2010 round 9.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 9679

Question: One deity from the mythology of this nation was put to death by her father but was exiled from the Land of the Dead because of her beautiful singing. One figure from a mythological octet of this people's myth is a female who ate powdered mica to become immortal. The thunder god of this mythos gained his power by eating a peach from an evil tree, after which he grew bat wings and a beak. Including the Three Pure Ones and the Eight Immortals, FTP what culture's myth venerates the Guanyin as well as the Jade Emperor?

ANSWER: China (prompt on "Buddhism" or "Taoism," as I hope "nation" will eliminate those)

Result: 1729 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 02 updated.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 9713

Question: One of them, named Pyrcamon was useful in developing three rays of frozen rain and red fire. In a play, one character of this type has his food stolen by Silenus, who is trying to trade it away. That play, named for this group, is the best preserved extant satyr play and was written by Euripides. Three of them were killed by Apollo for providing Zeus the thunderbolt that killed Asclepius. That group had members Arges and Steropes. Another one of these creatures was told that "my name is Nemo," and threw a rock to kill Acis before being blinded by Ulysses.

ANSWER: Cyclopes

Result: 1730 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 04 updated.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 9749

Question: He gained popularity when a cult of Khnum worshipped him, which later claimed that it was he who laid the golden cosmic egg that created the world. Some sources claim that this deity has a consort called Astennu, who stood by a lake of fire. This god's epithets include "thrice great" which led to his conflation with Hermes Trismegestus. As part of his most notable role, he was said to be the "tongue of Ra," and he once gambled with the moon to get extra light.

ANSWER: Thoth

Result: 1731 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 05 updated.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 9761

Question: One of these figures is the father of Pothos with the goddess Iris and the father of Carpo with Chloris, and also mated with the harpy Podarge in order to produce a pair of talking horses. Another one of these figures had a daughter named Chione and a group of horses that could ride over fields without crushing the plants. That figure once kidnapped Oreithyia to take as a wife, and had two sons that drove the Harpies away for Phineas. Another one of these figures helped transport Psyche to Eros' cave, and these figures were the children of Eos and Astraeus. One of them killed Hyacinth out of jealousy, and they included Notus, Eurus, Zephyrous, and Boreas. For 10 points, name this set of deities, sometimes said to be the servants of Aeolus, which control a certain meteorological phenomenon.

ANSWER: Four Winds or Anemoi

Result: 1732 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 06 updated.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 9781

Question: In Japanese myth, a pair of these creatures was the messengers of Hachiman, and after being created from flowers by Math and Gwydion, Bloddeuwed is transformed into one after betraying her husband. In Chinese myth, a group of these creatures is responsible for reuniting the cowherd and the weaver girl on the day of sevens, and in Irish mythology Dierdre has a dream about three of these animals drawing blood, foreshadowing death. In one story, after getting her tongue cut out by Tereus, Philomela and her sister Procne were turned into these creatures. Zeus transformed into one in order to kidnap Ganymede. For 10 points, name this type of creature, which also includes Garuda and Crow.

ANSWER: Birds (accept more specific answers)

Result: 1733 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 07 updated.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 9792

Question: One creature of this type gains energy from the North Wind, increasing his speed, but has less energy when in contact with the South Wind. One of these creatures chases an object pulled by Arvakr and Alsvidr, and that animal along with his brother chase the children of Mundilfari. A pair of these creatures are owned by a god who only subsists on wine, so they are fed his table scraps. Besides Geri, Freki, and Skoll, another creature of this sort will be killed by an ultra-powerful weapon consisting of all shoes ever made from the beginning of time; that shoe is worn by Vidarr. Bound to Gleipnir, that creature bit the hand off of Tyr and was the oldest offspring of Angrboda and Loki. For 10 points, identify this fuzzy type of creature, which includes Fenrir.

ANSWER: Wolf or wolves

Result: 1734 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 08 updated.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 9805

Question: One of this figure's brothers was a king of Megara who had a lock of purple hair that kept his kingdom safe, while another of this figure's brothers produced the Pallantides, which this his son annihilated during a succession crisis.

ANSWER:

Result: 1735 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 10 updated.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 9824

Question: These peoples believed that men and women were created by a war god who needed to offer human flesh to the sun to quench its hunger. That god that they worshipped lost a foot battling a crocodile in order to create the world only to replace that foot with a magic obsidian mirror. One goddess venerated by these people wore a necklace of hearts and skeletons and was impregnated by a ball of feathers. That impregnation led to a god worshipped by these people who often warred with Tezcatlipoca and is known as a "feathered serpent." For 10 points, which people's myth system includes Quetzalcoatl?

ANSWER: Aztecs

Result: 1736 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 11 updated.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 9843

Question: In the Gaesta Denorum, this deity ordered that a golden statue of her husband be stripped down. The deity sometimes sent the handmaiden Hlin to protect selected people, while another of her attendants has a horse that can cross oceans; those figures are Gna and Hovarpnir. This goddess, the only woman who can sit on Hildskalf, is sent a linen cloak by her daughter-in-law, and on another occasion this figure was passed on to Vili and Ve, her husband's brothers. This figure, who creates the clouds from her spinning wheel, famously asked everything except for the lowly mistletoe to not harm her son, leading to Loki goading Hodr into killing that son, Baldr. For 10 points, name this queen of the gods and wife of Odin.

ANSWER: Frigg

Result: 1737 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 12 updated.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 9863

Question: In Greek mythology, the Crinaeae inhabit these places, and Egeria, the wife of Numa Pompillius, turned into one of these after Numa's death. Apollo turned Castalia into one of these objects, which stands next to the Oracle at Delphi. After being chased by Alpheus, Arethusa was turned into one of these. One of these objects named for the nymph Pirene was a favorite spot of Pegasus, while Pegasus also created one of these sacred to the Muses known as the Hippocrene one. During the contest for the control of Athens, Poseidon gave the Athenians one of these objects, which they rejected. For 10 points, name these objects, another of which was the one "of Youth" searched for by Ponce de Leon, which are sources of underground water.

ANSWER: Spring or Well or Fountain

Result: 1738 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 13 updated.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 9885

Question: This god sons are Prosperity and Profit, and one of this deity's incarnations came to be in order to kill the demon king Sindhu. This deity's stomach once exploded after he ate a bunch of candy and flew towards the moon, and after Chandra laughed at him he slashed his face in half. He's not Rama, but this deity killed the demon brothers Narantaka and Devantaka in his incarnation of Mahotkana. He was created when Parvati wanted to take a bath and infused life into a boy made out of turmeric. He once won a race against his brother Skanda by standing still, he rides around on a mouse, and he attained his current form after being decapitated by Shiva. For 10 points, name this Hindu god with an elephant head.

ANSWER: Ganesh

Result: 1739 | EFT | 2010 | Round: Round 14 updated.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 9897

Question: Upon this figure's birth, this deity requested that the sixty daughters of Okeanos be made her servants, and this deity was responsible for turning Meleager's sisters to guinea fowl after their death. Brontes the Cyclops offered to make this figure anything, but this figure responded by tearing hair of his chest. One story claims that she killed another mythological figure while he was swimming away from a scorpion. One attendant of this figure, Callisto, slept with Zeus and was transformed into a bear. Oeneus forgot to offer a sacrifice to this goddess, resulting in the Calydonian Boar hunt, and a mortal who saw her bathing was eaten by his own dogs. For 10 points, name this deity who turned Actaeon into a stag and wielded a silver bow, the twin sister of Apollo and Greek goddess of the moon.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 1740 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2010 | Round: FKT 2010 David FINAL.rtf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 9913

Question: This figure in Greek myth was accused of trying to ravish Anteia, the wife of King Proteus. As a result, he was exiled with a note asking the reader to kill him, but King Iobates refused to do so, instead sending this man to complete a seemingly impossible task. This man, who was the grandson of Sisyphus and son of King Glaucus, received a golden bridle from Athena which he used to tame Pegasus, who he needed to complete his task. For ten points, identify this hero of Greek mythology who slew the Chimera.

ANSWER: Bellerophon

Result: 1741 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2010 | Round: FKT 2010 Dima FINAL.rtf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 9934

Question: This god's child rejected the love of Salmacis who prayed never to be separated from that son. Eventually Salmacis's and this god's son's bodies merged into one. Along with that son, Hermaphroditus, this god also fathered Pan according to some stories. He put all of Argus's eyes to sleep and then killed him in order to save Io, and his parents were Maia and Zeus. He delivered an herb to Odysseus in order to counter Circe's spell and owned a lyre and winged sandals. For 10 points, this is what counterpart to the Roman Mercury, the Greek messenger god.

ANSWER: Hermes (do not accept Mercury)

Result: 1742 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2010 | Round: FKT 2010 Jasper FINAL.rtf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 9991

Question: This god's wife was Sigyn, who bore him a son, Narfi. This god prevented an ice-giant from finishing a fortress by sleeping with Svaldifari and giving birth to Sleipnir. He helped retrieve Idun's golden apples and had several children with the female giant Angraboda. He will be imprisoned until Ragnarok, when he will kill and be killed by Heimdall, and among his children are the Midgard Serpent, Hel, and Fenrir. His imprisonment was due to causing Hodr to kill Baldur. For 10 points, name this trickster god of Norse myth.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 1743 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2010 | Round: FKT 2010 Steven FINAL.rtf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 10045

Question: One was performed using devices called krotala. Another of these was accomplished by killing Orthus. A third was preceded by a visit to Pholus, who later inadvertently killed himself with a poisoned arrow, while a fourth was performed with the help of Iolaus. Eurystheus disallowed one of them because payment was received from Augeus, and they were finally completed with the capture of Cerberus. The Lernaean Hydra and Nemian Lion were slain during, for 10 points, what collection of tasks assigned to a mythical Greek strongman.

ANSWER: Twelve Labors of Hercules [accept Heracles for Hercules]

Result: 1744 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 10.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 10083

Question: This group includes Bors, one of two who met the injured Fisher King, and its members honor an empty seat, the Siege Perilous. Another member gets a girdle from Lady Bertilak before going to the Green Chapel to face an enemy of that color. Their monarch loses the Battle of Camlann to Mordred, and their champion has an affair with Guinevere. For 10 points, name this Grail-seeking group including Percival, Gawain, and Lancelot, that dines with King Arthur at Camelot.

ANSWER: Knights of the Round Table [accept Knights of Camelot or Knights of King Arthur before those words are read; prompt "knights", "English knights," etc throughout]

Result: 1745 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 11.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 10105

Question: A goddess in this myth system dies giving birth to its fire god; her husband washed three gods from his eyes and nose after visiting her in its underworld, Yomi. Its shrines include gates called torii. One of its deities slew an eight-headed serpent; besides that storm god, Susano'o, others include the foxlike Inari and one who once hid in a cave, the sun goddess Amaterasu. For 10 points, name this belief system centered on worshipping the kami, or nature spirits, of Japan.

ANSWER: Shintoism [accept Kami-no-michi before "kami" is read; prompt "Japanese myth" before "Japan" is read]

Result: 1746 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 12.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 10128

Question: This god used red beer to pacify his daughter after punishing mankind by turning his eye into that daughter, the lioness Sekhmet. His tears and sweat created mankind, and after being poisoned, he revealed his secret name to Isis. His enemy is the dark serpent Apep, and this deity, the grandfather of sky and earth gods Nut and Geb, is often conflated with Atum or Amun and travels the sky in a barge. For 10 points, name this sun god, the chief deity of ancient Egypt.

ANSWER: Ra [or Re; accept Amun-Ra, Atum-Ra, or Ra-Horakhty throughout; prompt "Amun" or "Atum" by themselves before those words are read, but don't accept them alone afterwards]

Result: 1747 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 13.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 10140

Question: This god flayed Marsyas alive after losing a contest. The Cumaean Sibyl got her powers from this god who killed the sons of Niobe, and the site where this deity destroyed the Python was inhabited by the oracle at Delphi. This father of Asclepius was rejected by a nymph who turned into a laurel tree, Daphne, and was known for firing plague arrows in The Iliad and mastering the lyre. For 10 points, name this twin brother of Artemis, a god of oracles, music, and the sun.

ANSWER: Phoebus Apollo [do not accept "Helios" at any point]

Result: 1748 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 2.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 10165

Question: This god's children with Iphimedia were called the Aloadae, and he fathered Chrysaor and Pegasus by sleeping in Athena's temple with Medusa. In Athens, this god is identified with Erechtheus, as he lost the contest for control of that city to Athena. This husband of Amphitrite and father of Triton had the Cyclops son Polyphemus and is the patron god of horses. For 10 points, name this god who makes the earth shake with his trident, the Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon [prompt "Neptune" until "Athens" is read; do not accept it afterward]

Result: 1749 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 2.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 10168

Question: Beings of this type include the six-headed Thrudgelmir, his flood-surviving son Bergelmir, and the half-angel Nephilim of the Bible. Ymir was a primordial one of these beings in Norse myth, of whom Thor crushed one named Hrungnir, and the term jotunn often refers to their "frost" type. Greek ones included Orion and a bronze one named Talos. For 10 points, name these large mythological beings which include the antagonist of Jack and the Beanstalk and Goliath.

ANSWER: giants

Result: 1750 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 3.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 10191

Question: This man was a servant to Omphale, and he built his own funeral pyre before dying in a poisoned shirt given by Nessus to his last wife Deianira. After killing his first wife, Megara, he fled to serve King Eurystheus. This slayer of the dragon Ladon got Iolaus' help to kill a monster in the Lernean swamp before cleaning the Augean stables and slaying the Nemean Lion. For 10 points, name this hero who killed the Hydra as part of Twelve Labors showing his strength.

ANSWER: Hercules [ accept Heracles]

Result: 1751 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 5.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 10210

Question: This man fought the Cicones in Ismara, and a scar on his thigh from a boar hunt allowed him to be recognized by his servant Eurycleia. Some of his followers stayed with the Lotus-Eaters, and one man in his crew died by falling from Circe's hut. Held for eight years on the island of Calypso after blinding the cyclops Polyphemus, for 10 points, name this husband of Penelope and father of Telemachus, an Ithacan king who returns home in his namesake Homeric epic.

ANSWER: Odysseus [prompt "Ulysses"]

Result: 1752 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 7.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 10247

Question: This god consumed Halahala, a poison from the Ocean of Milk, and gained a blue throat as a result. The bull Nandi is the mount of this deity who killed the god Kama. One aspect of this god is the cosmic dancer Nataraja; the Ganges flows from his hair, and his primary residence is Mount Kailash. This father of elephant-headed Ganesha and husband of Parvati has a third eye. For 10 points, name this destroyer deity in the Hindu Trimurti.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 1753 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 8.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 10275

Question: One deity of this phenomenon commonly rides a ram and licks sacrificial butter with his seven tongues. In addition to the Vedic deity, Agni, this entity, which defines Surt and his world of Muspellheim in Norse myth, caused a Titan to be chained up and have his liver eaten by eagles, and is presided over, though not the forge, by Vulcan or Hephaestus. For 10 points, name this phenomenon stolen from the gods by Prometheus, which engulfs a dying phoenix.

ANSWER: fire [accept flame or other clear knowledge equivalents]

Result: 1754 | Fall Novice | 2010 | Round: Packet 9.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 10286

Question: This deity disguised himself as Bolverk and as a snake to sneak by the giant Suttung. He feeds all the food from his table to Geri and Freki, his wolves, and is told about all the world's events by Hugin and Munin, his ravens. This owner of the spear Gungnir and husband of Frigg gave his eye to Mimir and hung for nine days and nights off of the world-tree Yggdrasil to obtain wisdom. For 10 points, name this father of Baldur and Thor, the chief Norse god.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wotan; or Wotenaz]

Result: 1755 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 1 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 10301

Question: His son is known by the epithet "The Fair Unknown;" that son, Gingalain, sacrifices his love for a tournament. He is the son of King Lot of Orkney, and is often called 'courteous'. In one poem, he gets information on what women most desire after he marries Dame Ragnelle. He receives three kisses from Lady [*] Bercilak, who gives this man a girdle preventing injury, before he goes to a chapel and faces his axe-wielding nemesis. For 10 points, name this Knight of the Round Table, a nephew of King Arthur who goes on a quest to defeat the Green Knight.

ANSWER: Sir Gawain [accept Gawan, Gavan, Gauvain, Gwalchmei, or Walewein from annoying people] [JoC]

Result: 1756 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 10 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 10319

Question: When this god saw his own ugliness in a mirror, he became intoxicated and ended up in a debauchery with his own sister. He is said to return in a year of the One-Reed, after setting out to the East on a raft of [*] snakes. He created mankind by sprinkling his blood on some bones from the underworld Mictlan, and taught the cultivation of maize. He is associated with the morning star, unlike his twin brother Xolotl, and his rival is the god whose name means "smoky mirror", Tezcatlipoca. For 10 points, name this Aztec god, a plumed serpent for whom Montezuma mistook Cortez.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl [DU]

Result: 1757 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 12 [Finals 1] COMPLETE.docx | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 10367

Question: These objects are stolen by nine peahens in a Bulgarian epic, or by zmeu dragons in Romanian legend. Irish tales associate them with the Silver Bough, and in Norse myth, Idunn guards a [*] box of them, and they maintain the gods' youth. In Greek mythology, Heracles employed Atlas to obtain them from the Hesperides, and Melanion dropped three during a footrace to distract Atalanta. More notably, one of these was thrown into Thetis and Peleus' wedding by Eris. For 10 points, name this mythical foodstuff picked up by Paris with the inscription "For the fairest".

ANSWER: golden apples [they are all gold/golden, prompt on "fruit"] [MJ]

Result: 1758 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 13 [Finals 2] COMPLETE.docx | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 10383

Question: In one story, this figure disguises himself as the ferryman Harbard and refuses to ferry; in another, he engages with the giant Vafthrundr. This god owned an object which makes eight copies of itself every nine nights, the golden armband Draupnir. Advised by Hugin and Munin, two [*] ravens, this owner of the spear Gungnir and the eight-legged horse Sleipnir hung upside-down from Yggdrassil to gain understanding of runes, and drank from Mimir's well at the cost of one eye to gain wisdom. For 10 points, name this husband of Frigg whose halls include Valhalla, the chief Norse god.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wotan; accept similar forms] [MJ]

Result: 1759 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 13 [Finals 2] COMPLETE.docx | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 10400

Question: This deity helped absolve the sins of King Bhagirath's ancestors by using his hair locks to absorb an entire river as it flowed down from heaven. He contains the destructive aspect Kalamata, and is also associated with dance under the name [*] Nataraja. This rider of the white bull Nandi, worshipped through a phallic structure known as the lingam, was once strangled after swallowing the ocean, leading to his blue throat. Aspects of his female consort include Kali and the mother of Ganesh, Parvati. For 10 points, name this deity whose third eye annihilates all before it, a member of the Hindu Trimurti known as the destroyer.

ANSWER: Shiva [prompt 'Nataraja' until read] [MJ]

Result: 1760 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 2 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 10416

Question: This figure was given a magic belt by the giantess Grid, allowing him to kill Geirrod and his children. In another story, this figure uses Hymir's fishing line, and he donned as dress to appear as a bride and fool King Thrym into returning his stolen property. This god travels with Thialfi and Roskva, his [*] servants, in a chariot pulled by two goats, and he is married to Sif, who is renowned for her blonde hair. Destined to kill and be killed by the Midgard Serpent, for 10 points, name this owner of the hammer Mjolnir, the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [accept Donner or Donar] [DB-N]

Result: 1761 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 3 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 10428

Question: Other entities associated with this deity's domain include Telesto, Phorcys, and Glaucus. Once, this deity organized several others in a plot to make Zeus promise to be nicer by trapping him in a gold net. While in a temple with Medusa, [*] this god was caught, causing Athena to turn Medusa and her sisters into the gorgons. An olive tree was planted in one city while he failed in a contest to become its patron god, and this husband of Amphitrite created horses. For 10 points, name this father of Polyphemus, a Greek god who caused earthquakes with his trident and ruled over the seas.

ANSWER: Poseidon [prompt "Neptune"] [SR]

Result: 1762 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 4 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 10454

Question: When Derforgaill is in this form, Cu Chulainn once hits her with a sling, though he saves her by sucking the stone out. Louhi promises to give his daughter to Lemminkainen only if he can shoot this creature in Tuonela, the [*] underworld, in the Finnish epic Kalevala. Saraswati is often depicted sitting on a lotus or this animal. The wife of Tyndareus and mother of Helen and Clytemnestra laid eggs from which the Dioscuri came out, after she was raped by Zeus in this form. For 10 points, Leda is associated with what white, beautiful bird?

ANSWER: swan [DU]

Result: 1763 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 5 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 10467

Question: The oxyrhyncus fish was one danger to this deity, and the djed pillar often represented this deity's backbone. Also known for getting trapped in a box filled with molten lead, this god was syncretized with Apis and sometimes Zeus in the form of Serapis, and his cult center was [*] Abydos. His wife found all but one of the 14 pieces into which this god's half-brother Set had torn him, after which he was resurrected. Often depicted holding a flail and a crook, this husband of Isis and father of Horus is, for 10 points, what white-clothed Egyptian god, the ruler of the afterlife?

ANSWER: Osiris [accept Asar, accept Usire, accept other reasonably similar pronunciations]

Result: 1764 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 5 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 10482

Question: One god of this type from Celtic myth brewed beer that granted immortality to the drinker and was the son of Danu. In addition to Goibniu, a deity of this type in Finnish myth served as the patron of travelers and gave fire to man in addition to his more famous role. Along with Ilmarinen, who [*] made the Sampo, a Greek god of this type was raised by Thetis and Eurynome and worshipped at Lemnos after being thrown from Olympus by Hera. That god was married to Aphrodite, created the armor of Achilles and was lame. For 10 points, name this class of god, exemplified by Hephaestus in Greek mythology.

ANSWER: gods of the forge [or blacksmith gods; accept reasonable equivalents] [IE]

Result: 1765 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 6 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 10493

Question: A figure with this deity's name and the epithet Trismegistus wrote alchemical texts while syncretized with the Egyptian god Thoth, and another epithet describes this father of Autolycus as "conductor of souls", Psychopompus. He lulled the hundred eyes of [*] Argos to sleep before slaying him to save Io, and rescued a certain great-grandson by giving him moly on Aiaia and saving him from Ogygyia, Calypso's isle. The rod of Asclepius has one less snake than Caduceus, his staff, and he aided Perseus by lending his characteristic winged sandals. For 10 points, name this Greco-Roman messenger god with a winged cap.

ANSWER: Hermes [prompt "Mercury" since he first clue doesn't apply to him but all the rest do] [MJ]

Result: 1766 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 7 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 10507

Question: One of these from Magyar myth received sacrifices of white stallions; in addition to Hadur, another of these had jumping priests known as Salii, and in Irish mythology, a tripartite crow flying above this is known as the Morrigan. It's not the sun, but the [*] Aztec one of these was fathered by a ball of feathers and was notably left-handed. The Egyptian one, Sekhmet, is depicted as a lioness, and in Greek mythology, the god of this type was imprisoned for a year in a bronze urn, and had the children Phobos and Deimos. For 10 points, name this type of deity, examples of which include Huitzilopochtli and Ares.

ANSWER: god[s] of war [accept logical equivalents; accept forge gods or other equivalents before the words "jumping priests" are read, since Hadur is also a forge god, but not after] [JoC]

Result: 1767 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 8 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 10535

Question: This figure slew all but one of King Laomedon's sons after Laomedon broke a promise to give this figure magic horses, and impregnated fifty daughters of King Thespius in one night after slaying a beast in Cithaeron. He killed the centaur Nessus, whose poison blood was used by this man's [*] second wife Deianira to kill him. Philoctetes took up the bow of this figure, who freed Prometheus and cleaned the Augean Stables by rerouting two rivers. For 10 points, name this son of Alcmene and Zeus, who captured Cerberus, slew the Nemean Lion, and killed the Hydra as part of his 12 Labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [accept Hercules] [JoC]

Result: 1768 | GDS Ben Cooper Memorial | 2010 | Round: Ben Cooper 2010 Packet 9 COMPLETE.docx | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 10547

Question: This figure's grandfather, Pittheus, founded Troezen. After defeating Periphetes, this figure used his club. This figure killed a pet of Phaea, the Crommyonian Sow, on a land journey to Athens. He was killed after being pushed from a cliff by Lycomedes, and he aided Pirithous in an attempted [*] abduction of Persephone. In one story involving this figure, a curse placed on this figure led him to raise a black sail, resulting in the death of his father. The individual who cursed this figure had earlier given him a ball of string before being abandoned on Naxos. For 10 points, identify this Athenian who was loved by Ariadne and slew the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus [IE]

Result: 1769 | Harvard International | 2010 | Round: Finals 1.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 10670

Question: In one story, this figure defeated a lion by hiding in its den and distracting it with his steed, which was disguised as an elephant, and in another story this figure is confronted by a demon and asks to be thrown onto a mountain rather than into the sea. In his youth, this figure slayed a white elephant owned by King Manuchehr with only one blow from a mace, and this figure was so big at his birth that a caesarean section had to be performed on his mother Rudaba. This son of Zal rides the horse Rakhsh, and he performs seven labors culminating with the defeat of the White Demon and the rescue of Kay Kavus. He is perhaps most famous for a story in which after breaking a man's back during a fight, he discovered that he had mistakenly murdered his own son when the man reveals a piece of onyx. The father of Sohrab, for 10 points, identify this pre-Islamic hero of Persia whose deeds are recounted in Ferdowsi's epic Shahnameh.

ANSWER: Rostam

Result: 1770 | Harvard International | 2010 | Round: Finals 2.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 10703

Question: In one ritual of sacrifice to this deity, the victim was strapped to wood and shot with arrows so his blood could drip onto a round stone. This deity was responsible for skin and eye diseases and was often depicted with a bursting eye, and this patron of goldsmiths was sometimes known as "Youalahuan," or "the night drinker." This god was closely related to the female Xilonen deity, and in some variants, this figure was known as the "Red" form of the god Tezcatlipoca. In another ritual involving this figure, warriors wielding feathers were killed by warrior priests with wooden swords, and the bodies of the victims were painted with gold and paraded around by the priests begging for alms for twenty days. Although he had yellow skin, this deity was depicted carrying a bag of seeds and wearing flayed skin. For 10 points, name this Aztec god who flayed himself to bring food to humanity, a god of agriculture and fertility whose name means "Our Lord the Flayed One."

ANSWER: Xipe Totec [accept Youalahuan or Red Tezcatlipoca early]

Result: 1771 | Harvard International | 2010 | Round: Round 02.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 10742

Question: One of these figures took the form of a golden deer, but imitated the voice of its hunter when it was shot in its hide, and another one of these figures was made a king after he aided an opposing force by identifying many of these figures who were invisible. Another one of these creatures ate travelers in the Kamyaka forest but was strangled by Bhima, and one of these figures forced nearby villagers to deliver him human offerings for food. This group included Marica and the good Vibhishana, and these figures are said to be descended from Pulastya or Khasa. An army of 14,000 of them led by Khara were slaughtered in one day, and other accounts state that these figures were created from Brahma's foot, and these figures were divided into groups such as the Bhutas. These figures were defeated by the Vanaras at the Battle of Lanka, and they were led by a ten-headed figure who kidnapped Sita, for 10 points, name this demons from Hindu mythology who were led by Ravana and defeated by Rama in the Ramayana.

ANSWER: Rakshasas

Result: 1772 | Harvard International | 2010 | Round: Round 04.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 10783

Question: This mother of Cestrinus was worshipped at Pergamum, a town allegedly named after one of her sons. While at Epirus, she gave birth to that city's future king, Molossus, and was accused of casting spells that led to barrenness of Hermione. This figure's father Eetion was the king of Thebes and would be killed by the same man who would eventually kill her husband. In a work of Euripides, this figure laments that death is better than life in bitterness because one feels no pain in death before she is ultimately consigned to be the war prize of her son's killer, Neoptolemus. In her most famous appearance, this figure holds that aforementioned son, Astyanax, as he cries in front of her husband in Book 6 of the Iliad. For ten points, name this Trojan princess, the wife of Hector.

ANSWER: Andromache

Result: 1773 | Harvard International | 2010 | Round: Round 05.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 10796

Question: The tomb of Rameses VI contains a depiction of twelve heads representing the souls taken by this figure, and this figure was often depicted as a circular ball on tombs. In one story, this figure was born from the tears of the sun god, who was unable to see his mother because he was so bright. In some stories this figure possessed a flint head, and its name meaning "he who was spat out" refers to his birth when the archer goddess Neith spat him into the primeval waters. This figure was said to be aided by Mot and Sek, and during the seventh hour this figure was bound by Selk, Her-desuf, and Mehen. This figure's death came when it was chopped into pieces by a god in the form of a cat, and a ritual banishing of this creature involved smearing its effigy with mud. This figure is called "the encircler of the world," and this creature was reborn every day and waited in the Duat for its attack on the solar barque. For 10 points, name this representation of darkness and evil, a serpent from Egyptian mythology who battled Ra every night.

ANSWER: Apophis [accept Apep]

Result: 1774 | Harvard International | 2010 | Round: Round 06.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 10818

Question: Herodotus reports that a temple to Hephaestus in Egypt featured a statue dedicated to these creatures after they helped the pharaoh Sethos defeat the armies of Sennacherib by destroying their weapons. According to Aelian, these creatures were worshipped at Hamaxitus, where they were fed at the temple of the deity with whom they are most often associated. That deity was Apollo Smintheus, whose epithet may have referred to his relationship with these creatures. While these animals were routing their most famous foe, Zeus sent an army of crabs to prevent these creatures from totally annihilating their enemies. That battle was precipitated when the king of these creatures was drowned while crossing a river on back of the king of their future enemies. That war was known as the Batrachomyomachia. For ten points, name these creatures, who, in a mock epic allegedly written by Homer, do battle with frogs and like eating cheese.

ANSWER: Mouse or mice

Result: 1775 | Harvard International | 2010 | Round: Round 08.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 10848

Question: In one legend, this deity told Lombard women to appear at dawn with their hair drawn over their faces, and another form of this deity is a seer named Saga. This deity was served by Hlin, who was responsible for protecting certain men from harm, and Syn, who guarded the palace door. Orion's belt was known as this figure's "distaff," and servants of this deity include the rider of Hofvarpnir, Gna, and one who carries this deity's shoes and ash box named Fulla. This deity has the gift of prophecy, yet never reveals what she knows, and this figure's home means "marsh halls," and is the place where this figure spins clouds on a loom. This figure is one of two who are allowed to sit atop the Hlidskhalf, and while her husband was away this deity had affairs with his brothers Vili and Ve. Ruling from the hall Fensalir, for 10 points, name this Norse goddess who was distraught over the death of her son Balder, the queen of Asgard and the wife of Odin.

ANSWER: Frigg [accept Frigga]

Result: 1776 | Harvard International | 2010 | Round: Round 09.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 10862

Question: Out of her love for this figure, the girl Comaetho cut the golden hair of her father Pterelaus which made him invincible. That allowed this man to conquer the Taphians, who he handed over to Cephalus, and this figure's house was constructed by Trophonius and Agamedes. This figure threw his club at a disobediant cow, which rebounded and killed his uncle Electryon, leading to this man's banishment. This figure wasn't allowed to marry his future wife until he avenged the death of all of her brothers, and he accomplished this by borrowing the dog Laelaps and defeating the Teumessian fox for the king Creon. This son of Alcaeus fathered the boy Iphicles, and Zeus visited his wife in the form of this man during a night which he made three times its normal length. An opponent of the Euboeans and the Minyans, for 10 points, identify this general from Thebes, the husband of Alcmena and the foster father of Heracles.

ANSWER: Amphitryon

Result: 1777 | Harvard International | 2010 | Round: Round 10.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 10880

Question: In one story, this figure doesn't approach a man yelling "bring the booty" and "beat them up," because he confuses the first phrase for a prayer to Shiva, and servants of this figure got into a quarrel with Vishnu over Ajamila, who had a son named Narayana. This figure was kicked to death after pulling the faithful Markandeya away from his lingam, and this figure was part of the first pair of humans according to the Vedas. This deity's twin sister was the goddess of the Yamuna River, and this owner of two four-eyed dogs was aided by Chitragupta, who read from his records called the Agrasamdhana. This deity represents south on a compass, and this figure's steed is a water buffalo, which he rides carrying a rope and a mace. He lives in a palace called Kalichi in a realm called Naraka, and according to the Vedas this figure gained his position by being the first mortal to die. For 10 points, name this Hindu god of death.

ANSWER: Yama

Result: 1778 | Harvard International | 2010 | Round: Round 11.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 10893

Question: This figure was almost killed by the Calydonian Boar, but he used his spear to pole vault into a tree, saving himself. One brother of this figure changed into the form of a bee but was shot by an arrow from Heracles. That brother, Periclymenus, died as a part of the eleven brothers of this figure, who was spared because he was raised in Gerenia. This figure had a son named Pisistratus, and Zeus sent Agamemnon a false dream in the form of this figure during the Trojan War. This figure's son won the chariot race at the funeral games of Patroclus, and another of this figure's sons gave his armor to Diomedes before their night raid. This son of Neleus and Chloris fought against neighboring Elis and the Moliones, and in the Odyssey, Telemachus visited thing figure before continuing on to Sparta. This man fathered Thrasymedes and Antilochus, and during the Trojan war this man mediated the dispute between Agamemnon and Achilles. The ruler of Pylos, for 10 points, identify this old figure, the wisest man at Troy.

ANSWER: Nestor

Result: 1779 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 1 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 51412

Question: This figure once defeated a demon while lifting the Earth back from the bottom of the ocean where that demon had taken it. In addition to waging that thousand-year battle with Hiranyaksha, which was fought in the shape of a boar, this figure was identified with a half-lion, half-man called Narasimha. This figure's mount was the bird Garuda, and he also appeared as the blue-skinned, flute-playing Prince Krishna. For 10 points, name this four-armed Hindu preserver god whose various avatars are venerated by Vaishnavas.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 1780 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 10 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 51596

Question: This figure's grandson with the same name was the first husband of Clytemnestra who was killed by Agamemnon. This father of Broteas was also the father of a woman who was turned into an eternally weeping stone and a man who was aided by Myrtilus in defeating Oenomaus in a chariot chase. This figure, a son of Zeus and Himas's daughter Pluto, stole nectar and ambrosia from a banquet in Mount Olympus and served his son Pelops to the gods. For 10 points, name this king of Sipylus who was punished in the Underworld by the constant presence of food and water which escaped his grasp.

ANSWER: Tantalus

Result: 1781 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 2 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 51419

Question: Some sources identify this figure as the offspring of Schoeneus or of Clymene and Iasus, and the sons of Thestius were killed in a controversy over this figure. During games honoring King Pelias, this figure triumphed over Peleus. Sexual indiscretion in the temple of Zeus led to this figure's transformation into a lioness, and she was awarded the hide of the Calydonian boar by Meleager. For 10 points, name this Arcadian huntress who was distracted by three golden apples, causing her to lose a footrace to her future husband Hippomenes.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 1782 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 3 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 51453

Question: In order to obtain an antidote after he was bitten by a snake, this god was forced to reveal his secret name to Isis, and his aspects include the Benu bird and the Mnevis bull. This god was born from a mound emerging from the primeval waters of Nun, and his daughter's feather is weighed against the hearts of the dead. This father of Maat was defended by Set and Mehen from the monster Apep while piloting a barque through the underworld each night. Combined with Amun during the New Kingdom, For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of the Sun.

ANSWER: Ra [accept Re]

Result: 1783 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 3 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 51459

Question: In one story, this figure anonymously wore a red sleeve with pearls given to him by the daughter of Bernard, and this figure later healed a man named Urry. The graves around this figure's home magically vanished before he changed its name from Dolorous Guard to Joyous Guard. In another episode, this slayer of Meliagrance killed Agravaine before fleeing to France, where he defeated Gawain in a duel. The father of Galahad, For 10 points, name this knight of the Round Table who had a disastrous affair with Guinevere.

ANSWER: Lancelot

Result: 1784 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 4 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 51470

Question: One son of this figure was placed in a box and given to the three daughters of Cecrops, and this figure aided Achilles by driving off the river god Axius. The father of Erichthonius, this god gave fire-breathing bulls to Aeetes and was carried on the back of a mule after Dionysus made him drunk. This god used a bed with a net to catch his wife in the act of adultery, and he was nursed to health on Lemnos after Zeus threw him from Mount Olympus, crippling him. For 10 points, name this husband of Aphrodite, the Greek god of smiths and fire.

ANSWER: Hephaestus

Result: 1785 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 5 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 51490

Question: This figure is identified with the kenning "Vidgymnir of Vimur's ford", and this figure is taunted for spending a night in the thumb of a giant's glove in a dialogue with his father disguised as the ferryman Harbard. A commission for the sons of Ivaldi resulted from the cutting of his wife's hair, and this god cross-dressed to impersonate Freya prior to killing the giant Thrym. At Ragnarök he will kill and be killed by Jormungand, and he is the husband of Sif and the son of Jord and Odin. The wielder of the hammer Mjöllnir, For 10 points, name this Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 1786 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 5 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 51491

Question: One meteor shower associated with this constellation lasts from June 5 to July 18 and is identified by the letter "Beta", and another meteor shower associated with this constellation is linked with the comet Encke and divided into "Northern" and "Southern" branches. This constellation contains Maia and Alcyone, both members of the Pleiades open star cluster, and its orange alpha star is the giant Aldebaran. For 10 points, name this constellation containing the supernova remnant Crab Nebula and known as "the bull".

ANSWER: Taurus

Result: 1787 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 6 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 51513

Question: In Greek mythology, one of these objects was used by Odysseus to heal Telephus, and another of these objects was made from the bone of a sea monster called the Coinchenn and presented as a gift from Scathach. That object caused the deaths of Connla and later Ferdiad during the Cattle Raid of Cooley. In addition to that one owned by Cúchullain, the Gae Bulg, another of these objects was made for Odin by the sons of Ivaldi and never missed its mark. Exemplified by Gungnir, For 10 points, name this weapon consisting of a shaft and a pointed head.

ANSWER: Spear

Result: 1788 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 7 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 51541

Question: This god's son Picus was too young to succeed him as a king, and this god was identified as "the sower" with the name Consivius. With the nymph Camasene, he fathered a son who drowned in the Albula River, causing it to be renamed. The father of Tiberinus, this god sprung hot water geysers in the faces of the attacking Sabines, and his temple was closed in times of peace. For 10 points, name this Roman god of beginnings, ends, and doorways who notably has two faces and is the namesake of the first month.

ANSWER: Janus

Result: 1789 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 8 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 51552

Question: This figure was associated with a tree which was cut down and used as a pillar in the palace of the king of Byblos, and the god Serapis was a syncretism of Apis and this figure. This god's cult was centered at Abydos, and he was usually depicted wearing the atef crown and holding a crook and a flail. In one story, this god was chopped into fourteen pieces after being trapped in a coffin by his brother, though the pieces were eventually recovered by Nephthys and his wife Isis. Murdered by Set, For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Osiris

Result: 1790 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: 9 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 51570

Question: In the poem The Curse of Agade, this figure refuses to support Naram-Sin after allowing his predecessor to rise to power, and this figure stole the me prior to making a journey in which she was required to shed an article of clothing at each of a series of seven gates. This goddess was included with Sin and Shamash in a celestial triad when identified with Venus, and she journeyed to the underworld to rescue her lover Tammuz. Symbolized by a lion, this goddess sent the Bull of Heaven to attack Enkidu after unsuccessfully attempting to seduce Gilgamesh. For 10 points, name this Mesopotamian goddess of war and love.

ANSWER: Ishtar [accept Inanna]

Result: 1791 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 51616

Question: This figure is often depicted wearing a pendant called the "wind jewel", and he summoned a hurricane to blow away humans who had been turned into monkeys. Also associated with Ehecatl, this god retrieved the bones of the dead from Mictlan, and he either immolated himself and became Venus or was exiled on a raft of snakes when expelled by Tezcatlipoca, after which he was predicted to return as a white-skinned man. The twin brother of Xolotl, For 10 points, name this "feathered serpent", the creator god of the Aztecs.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 1792 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 51627

Question: This god unsuccessfully tried to protect the Khandava forest from the hungry Agni, and he was born along with Agni from the mouth of the giant Purusha. With the help of his attendants, the Maruts, he rescued stolen cattle from the demon Vala, and this god rides the four-tusked elephant Airavata. He drank three bowls of soma in preparation for his greatest task involving storming ninety-nine fortresses and slaying a serpent who had stolen the world's water, Vritra. For 10 points, name this wielder of Vajra, the Hindu god of storms.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 1793 | Maggie Walker GSAC | 2010 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 51636

Question: This figure's daughter murdered King Lycotherses, the king of the Illyrians against whom he fought alongside the Encheleans. This figure placed Membliarus in charge of one island, and some of his followers were killed at a spring called Dirce or Castalia. According to some myths, this father of Semele acted on advice from the Delphic oracle by following a cow until it lay down from exhaustion, and according to some myths, he was aided by the Sparti, men who sprang from the ground when he sowed the teeth of the dragon of Ares. For 10 points, name this husband of Harmonia, the legendary founder of Thebes.

ANSWER: Cadmus

Result: 1794 | Minnesota Open | 2010 | Round: Round 06 - Michigan.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 11257

Question: One story assigns Dexamenus, the son of Oeceus, as this character's father, and tells of how she was briefly forcibly betrothed to Eurytion; however, other versions of that story replace this character with Mnesimache. One of this woman's children volunteered to be sacrificed to Persephone in order to avert war between Eurystheus and Demophon. The fact that she was a daughter of Oeneus and Althaea made her the sister of Meleager. Her future husband defeated the bull-horned river god (*) Achelous in a contest for her hand, and she later became jealous of that husband's interest in Iole, causing her to seek a way to ensure his faithfulness. She acquired a mixture of blood, oil, and semen that would supposedly do just that from her erstwhile captor, the centaur Nessus, but when she spread it on her husband's shirt, it ended up killing him. For 10 points, identify this woman whose name means "man-destroyer", likely a reference to her accidental killing of her husband Heracles.

ANSWER: Deianira [accept Mnesimache before that name is read]

Result: 1795 | Minnesota Open | 2010 | Round: Round 07 - Chicago B.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 11294

Question: One figure who took the form of this creature was said to hang out at the mountain Bakhu and was sometimes depicted being decapitated by the Great Cat of Iunu at the foot of a sycamore tree. Other adopters of this form include Kauket, the female form of the darkness god Kuk, and a two-headed god who guarded Duat named Nehebkau. One text claims that a god who took this form first appears at the seventh hour; that god is also the namesake of a segmented (*) board used in a namesake marble game. Possibly the best-known of these creatures was married to the fertility goddess Taweret and is fought off by Set, who sits in the helm of the solar barque. For 10 points, identify this animal whose form was adopted by both Ra's protector Mehen and Ra's enemy Apep.

ANSWER: snakes [or serpents; even accept dragons since apparently Apep is sometimes depicted as one]

Result: 1796 | Minnesota Open | 2010 | Round: Round 08 - Chicago C.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 11303

Question: One ritual dedicated to this non-Christian deity involved priests or midwifes greeting her as they sprinkled newborns with drops of water before naming them. This deity is often depicted carrying a cross representing the four winds. In one story, this deity was accused of not truly loving humanity, which caused her to cry blood for over fifty years, resulting in a flood that ended the age of the fourth sun. This goddess was usually depicted as a river from which grew a (*) prickly pear tree, the fruit of which symbolized the human heart. Sometimes said to be the consort of Xiuhtecuhtli, she and her more famous marital partner were the parents of a god usually depicted wearing a seashell on his back, the moon god Tecciztecatl. For 10 points, identify this jade-skirt-wearing goddess, the second wife of Tlaloc.

ANSWER: Chalchiuhtlicue [chal-chee-OO-tli-cue or chal-chee-OO-tli-kway]

Result: 1797 | Minnesota Open | 2010 | Round: Round 09 - UCSD.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 11335

Question: The lips of a black stone statue of this figure almost speak out after the sun's rays fall on him, making his eyes come alive, in a story about him that describes his premature death after ruling the longest-lived people on Earth for five generations. Droplets from the Aesepus River sprinkle the grave of this figure, which is cleaned of dust by birds that formed from the smoke of his funeral pyre. This man's army becomes a (*) flock of birds after he perishes, which occurs not long after the death of his comrade Aithops. This brother of Emathion figure built a shiny palace at Ecbatana after his father, the wizened Tithonus, had traveled there. He successfully defeated Nestor's son Antilochus in single combat, but was stabbed through the heart in revenge by Achilles. For 10 points, name this son of Eos who fought for Troy in the Trojan War, a king of Ethiopia.

ANSWER: Memnon

Result: 1798 | Minnesota Open | 2010 | Round: Round 10 - Editors 1.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 11348

Question: The Homeric Hymn to this figure describes how he and a foe both encounter a man tilling his fields on the grassy plain of Onchestus. He fathered the founder of Cydonia with Minos's daughter Acacallis, while his dalliance with a naiad often thought to be equivalent to Muta or Tacita made him the father of the Lares. This figure, who changed the Minyades into bats, was forced to kill Hierax with a stone in one story. Envy's poison once caused Aglaurus to occupy a threshhold in an attempt to prevent this figure from marrying Herse. Another of his adventures saw him thwart (*) Circe's magic by giving the herb moly to Odysseus. This killer of Argus Panoptes was also the father of the master thief Autolycus. He was born on Mount Cyllene, where one day later he invented the lyre. For 10 points, name this son of Maia who wore a winged hat and winged sandals in his role as messenger of the Greek gods.

ANSWER: Hermes [or Mercury]

Result: 1799 | Minnesota Open | 2010 | Round: zFinals 1 - DO NOT READ FOR PRELIMS.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 11391

Question: One of these figures was once ambushed while bathing in the Puchai River, but was able to defend himself with a Greek hat. That figure later becomes stuck in the pools of blood left over from a three-day-long duel, but he uses a magic incantation and his spear to clear the blood away, allowing him to rescue Zabava. Another of these figures won a duel by praying for rain, which soaked the paper wings of his opponent, the dragon Tugarin. The best-known of these characters, who was unable to walk until age 33, defeated a wind demon known as (*) Nightingale the Robber while riding through the Black Mire and was given strength by the giant knight Sviatogor. They were depicted together in a famous painting by Viktor Vasnetsov, and they all served in the court of Vladimir the Fair Sun in Kiev. For 10 points, identify this group of Slavic folk heroes that included Dobrynya Nikitich, Alyosha Popovich, and Ilya Muromets.

ANSWER: bogatyrs [prompt on equivalents like "Russian knights-errant" or whatever]

Result: 1800 | Minnesota Open | 2010 | Round: zFinals 2 - DO NOT READ FOR PRELIMS.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 11411

Question: One cult center of this god featured an unusual symmetrical double temple wherein he was worshipped in the southern half while Tasenetnofret, Panebtawy, and Horus the Elder were worshipped in the northern half. He is often depicted holding an ankh, which he uses to undo evil, and wearing a tall golden feathered crown with a uraeus on each side. His cult centers include al-Fayyum, the aforementioned Kom Ombo, and the former Arsinoe, and this son of Neith was the patron deity of the (*) pharaohs. In a more familiar role, he invented a fish-trap that recovered Horus's severed hands, was able to save the four sons of Horus by catching them in a net, and personified the annual floods. For 10 points, identify this Egyptian god of the Nile whose animal form is suggested by the name of another of his major cult centers, Crocodilopolis.

ANSWER: Sobek [or Suchos; or Sebek; or Sochet; or Sobk; or Sobki; or Soknopais]

Result: 1801 | Minnesota Open | 2010 | Round: zzExtra - Toronto.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 11431

Question: In Euripides's Cyclops, Silenus claims to have sent these figures flying with the braying of his ass. Another of these figures shares his name with a youth loved by Eurybarus who volunteered to sacrifice himself to the monster Sybaris. Two of them were were born after Aphrodite took offense to their mother Polyphonte's lack of respect and caused her to have sex with a bear. Pausanias claims that Rhea employed one of these named Hopladamus to defend her from Cronus, while the Fates used "brazen clubs" to kill one of them named (*) Thoas. The assistance of Heracles was necessary to defeat a group of them led by Alcyoneus. Two of them, the sons of Aloeus, attempted to reach Mount Olympus by stacking Mount Ossa on top of Mount Pelion, while another of them was buried under Mt. Etna. For 10 points, identify this group of figures that included Otus, Ephialtes, and Enceladus, known both for leading an uprising after the Titanomachy and for being huge.

ANSWER: giants [or Gigantes]

Result: 1802 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - DanDon+Minnesota - Done.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 11476

Question: One of this man's sons supplied the Greeks with wine during the Trojan War; that man Eueneus and his brother Nebrophonus were sons this man had on Lemnos with Hypsipyle. Pindar claims that this man was known as "Diomedes" until his tutor Chiron gave him his better-known name. While crossing the Anaurus River on the way to Iolcus, this man lost a sandal, which allowed Pelias to recognize him. Phineas once advised this man to send a dove through the Symplegades. In order to recover an object once brought to Colchis by Phrixus, he harnessed fire-breathing bulls and, like Cadmus, sowed dragon's teeth into the ground. For 10 points, identify this husband of Medea who led the Argonauts in search of the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Jason [or Iason]

Result: 1803 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - EP Gaurav - Done.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 11495

Question: This figure accidentally killed a man while engaged to the daughter of King Pittheus, Aertha. Stheneboea, the wife of Proteus, accused him of raping her, and she later killed herself when she found out that this figure married her sister. This figure delivered a letter ordering his own death to King Iobates of Lycia. He consulted Polyidus before setting out to kill a monster plaguing that region. He became a wandering cripple after Zeus used a gadfly to thwart this husband of Philonoe in his attempt

ANSWER: Bellerophon

Result: 1804 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - EP Tony - Done.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 11508

Question: This figure's daughter Benthesikyme rescued and raised his son Eumolpos. Zeus convinced a group of centaurs to trample to death a figure once raped by this deity, who changed that maiden into the invulnerable male warrior Caeneus after ravishing her. This figure's tryst on the floor of Athena's temple convinced Athena to turn Medusa into a hideous Gorgon. This deity loses a contest to Athena after she creates the first olive tree, making her the patron of Athens. He had sons like Polyphemus and Triton, who could control the waves with a conch shell. For 10 points, name this wielder of the Trident, the Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 1805 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Finals 1 [DO NOT READ FOR PRELIMS] - Done.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 11525

Question: One source says that this god learned how to have sex by mimicking a pair of wagtails. One of this god's journeys led him through the "country of deep roots," where he found a peach tree whose fruit he used to ward off the thunder gods and

ANSWER: Izanagi-no-Mikoto

Result: 1806 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Finals 1 [DO NOT READ FOR PRELIMS] - Done.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 11534

Question: The Alvars were a mystical sect who worshipped this figure, and devotees of this figures followed scholars such as Ramanujacharya and Chaitanya, the latter of whom founded the Gaudiya school. Those devotees of this figure revered the Bhagavata Purana. The Vijayanagaras built the Ranganatha temple dedicated to this deity at Srirangam, and this deity possesses a conch called Panchajanya.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 1807 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Finals 2 [DO NOT READ FOR PRELIMS] - Done.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 11559

Question: One figure in this myth system, known as The Earthquake, is lured into eating a gypsum-prepared bird when he is promised to be led to a giant mountain that keeps growing. One figure in this myth system loses his arm, after which he instructs two gods disguised as elderly dentists to replace a rebellious figure's teeth with white corn. This myth system contains a story about the downfall of Seven Macaw. The rain deity in this mythos is Chaac. Central to this mythos are figures called Hunahpu and Xbalanque, the "Hero Twins." Its underworld is known as Xibalba. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican culture whose myths are recounted in the Popul Vuh.

ANSWER: Mayans

Result: 1808 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Minnesota 1 - Done.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 11564

Question: In Hebrew myth, Lilith brings one of these items, which had previously been in a demon's den, into her daughter's room, causing her daughter to desire young men and prompting the saying that Lilith resides in all of these items. In another myth, a goddess is encouraged to look at one of these items after another goddess turns over a washtub and does a breast-exposing dance. In that myth, a goddess exclaims "white face!" after viewing one of them. Tezcatlipoca's name signifies a "smoking obsidian" variety of this item, one of which was placed across from Amaterasu's cave. For 10 points, name these objects, glassy surfaces that Narcissus would probably like a lot.

ANSWER: mirrors

Result: 1809 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Minnesota 2 - Done.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 11592

Question: This deity, who was represented by was scepters and the sha, once ordered that Nemty's toes be cut off, while Neith once suggested that this deity be given Anat and Astarte as concubines. He was tricked into attempting to sail a stone boat by a figure who also evaded his attempted sodomy and ejaculated into this god's lettuce. This deity's bragging led to him being banned from Ra's solar barque, where he fought the serpent Apep. This god, who was especially favored by the Hyksos, also ate the penis of a deity that he tore into fourteen pieces. For 10 points, name this husband of Nephthys, a villainous Egyptian god of the desert who killed his brother Osiris, making him an eternal rival of his nephew Horus.

ANSWER: Set [or Seth; or Sutekh; or Seteh]

Result: 1810 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Minnesota 3 - Done.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 11619

Question: In some idols of this figure, his head is shown surrounded by a circle of flames. He is shown possessing a drum whose beat provides the rhythm of the universe and one of this god's sons killed the asura Mahisha. This figure is given an epithet that indicates his burning of Kama with the use of his third eye.

ANSWER: Shiva [or Shankara]

Result: 1811 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Minnesota 6 - Done.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 11676

Question: The relationship between this figure and his father is referenced in a kenning for that father, "fadir logseims." This figure was once encountered after a giant caught a pair of whales and another figure baited his hook with an ox-head, though Hymir cut the line before this figure could be reeled in. In another story, Utgard-Loki congratulated this figure's primary rival, who was able to lift him off the ground while he was disguised as a cat. Odin threw him into the ocean surrounding the earth, and he grew so big that he encircled the world. For 10 points, name this offspring of the giantess Angrboda and Loki who will be killed by Thor at Ragnarok and who was sometimes known as the "Midgard Serpent."

ANSWER: Jormungandr [accept

Result: 1812 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Minnesota 7 - Done.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 11690

Question: This figure is responsible for the slaying of the famed warrior Aeschere, whose head is found by this figure's lair. This figure lives beneath a lake, and the protagonist must swim for almost a day to reach the lake's bottom. The protagonist kills this creature using a giant sword he finds, as this monster is invulnerable to the blade Hrunting, which was given to the protagonist by Unferth immediately before the battle. Like its offspring, this creature is said to be a descendant of the first murderer, Cain. After killing this monster, the protagonist then decapitates the body of her monstrous son. For 10 points, identify this unnamed monster, killed by the slayer of her son, Beowulf.

ANSWER: Grendel's Mother [accept equivalents]

Result: 1813 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Minnesota 7 - Done.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 11703

Question: In one appearance, this deity throws a magnificent whetstone into the air, causing nine reapers to slit each others' throats in a jealous attempt to get it. This deity turns into a snake to slither through a hole drilled by Baugi, at whose palace he stayed in the guise of Bolverk. Suttung and this god engaged in a chase in the form of eagles after this deity stole the mead of poetry. He joined with his brothers Vili and Ve to slay the giant Ymir. This deity hung from his own spear, Hrungnir, for nine days to gain knowledge of runes. He sacrificed an eye to gain wisdom by drinking from the well of Mimir. For 10 points, name this "All Father," the chief god of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wodinaz]

Result: 1814 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Minnesota 8 - Done.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 11716

Question: He angrily fired an arrow at the sun, which caused Helios to give him a golden cup. This figure killed the dog Orthrus while battling an enemy with three bodies. He was served wine by Pholus, who accidentally died after touching one of this figure's arrows. After being reprimanded for errors, he killed his musical tutor Linus. He himself was killed after wearing a garment soaked with the blood of the centaur Nessus, which was given to him by his wife Deianira. He wore the invincible pelt of the Nemean Lion as a cloak after killing it. For 10 points, name this Greek hero, a son of Zeus, who notably cleaned the Augean stables and killed the Hydra as part of his twelve labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [accept Hercules]

Result: 1815 | MUT | 2010 | Round: MUT 2010 - Minnesota 9 - Done.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 11739

Question: In one story, Hera sent horses belonging to this god all around the earth to threaten any town that would let Leto in to give birth to Apollo and Artemis. One of this god's sons attempted to construct a temple to him made of the skulls and bones of murdered travelers; that son, Cycnus, was killed by Heracles.This god was often accompanied by such figures as Polemos's daughter Alala and the goddess Enyo. Hermes once rescued this god from an urn in which he had been imprisoned by Otus and Ephialtes. Children of this god include Penthesilea, Eros, Phobos, and Deimos. For 10 points, name this Olympian deity, a son of Zeus and Hera, who served as the Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares

Result: 1816 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 1.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 11758

Question: This god failed to burn a boy and his reed after boastfully claiming he could engulf everything. This deity's mount had the ability to separate mixtures of milk and water, and he himself was said to have developed five heads by gazing at Shatarupa. When enlisted to partake in the yajna fire-sacrifice, this deity was too entranced by the music-playing of his wife to notice Bhrigu, who cursed him to never be worshiped. This creator of the progenitor prajapatis took a second consort named Gayatri, rode the swan Hamsa, and emerged from a lotus in the naval of Vishnu. For 10 points, name this husband of Saraswati, the creator god of the Hindu Trimurti.

ANSWER: Brahma

Result: 1817 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 10.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 11776

Question: The poet Mirabai wrote songs about her love for this god. This god drained the life out of Putana, who attempted to poison him with her breast milk. This god tamed and danced on Kaliya, a naga who poisoned the Yamuna River, and infuriated Indra by teaching the natives of Vrindavana to take care of their land. This god opened his mouth and showed his mother the entire universe after she accused him of stealing butter. Kamsa sent several demons to attack this husband of Radha, one of the gopi maidens he seduced. For 10 points, name this eighth avatar of Vishnu and charioteer of Arjuna in the Bhagavad-Gita.

ANSWER: Krishna

Result: 1818 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 12.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 11818

Question: This figure, who dropped boulders on some Amazons, had Poseidon flood the plain of Xanthus while he fought the pirate Cheirmarrhus, whose women lifted their robes up in retreat. He was offered the hand of Philonoe in marriage and spent his last days as a blind cripple on the Aleion Plain. Earlier, this possible murderer of Deliades was falsely accused of trying to romance Stheneboea, the wife of Proteus, who sent him to Lycia to await the judgment of King Iobates. Instead, he slew the Chimera with the aid of a mount that would later throw him when he attempted to reach the top of Olympus. For 10 points, identify this Greek hero who rode Pegasus.

ANSWER: Bellerophontes

Result: 1819 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 13.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 11832

Question: One daughter of this woman eloped with the King of Dulichium while married to the King of Arcadia. This woman's husband helped Odysseus court his niece Penelope. The role that this mother of Phoebe, Philonoe, and Timandra played is sometimes also filled by Nemesis, and involves her lover coming to her arms to seek protection from an eagle. This woman slept with her husband Tyndareus, resulting in two eggs containing Clytemnestra, Helen, Castor, and Pollux. For 10 points, name this queen of Sparta who bore those children after Zeus impregnated her in the form of a swan.

ANSWER: Leda

Result: 1820 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 14.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 11864

Question: One of these figures used the dove as a messenger and is named for "eight heavenly banners." Another of these figures was known for his "ruddy face" and was married to a woman who performed an erotic dance on an overturned tub. An earlier one of these figures gave birth to the leech child after speaking out of turn, and turned the realm of Yomi against her husband, who created three children by washing his face. One of them tossed a flayed horse to upset another, who hid in a cave, from which she was lured by Uzume. For 10 points, name this group of deities and spirits such as Izanagi, Susano'o, and Amaterasu, who populate the mythology of Japan.

ANSWER: Kami [accept gods of war before mention of "ruddy face"]

Result: 1821 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 15.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 11881

Question: Huitzilopochtli threw one of these objects belonging to Copil into Lake Texcoco. People were buried squatting and carrying a jade bead, which represented them, in the seventh trial on the journey to Mictlan. When people questioned Hanuman's reverence for Rama and Sita, he showed them that they resided in this object of his. Birds warned Sigurd of Regin's arrival after the former ate the one belonging to Fafnir. Ammit devoured the ones heavier than the feather of Ma'at. As a sacrifice to the sun gods, Aztec priests extracted these objects from living victims. For 10 points, name these organs through which a stake must be pushed to kill a vampire.

ANSWER: hearts

Result: 1822 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 16.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 11907

Question: The son of one woman of this name was a Trojan warrior loved by Sarpedon and named Atymnius. In addition to King Phoenix's wife, the more famous figure of this name was associated with both a crown and a throne, as she was upside-down for half of eternity. Some accounts say that her country was destroyed by a flood, but all accounts agree that her words upset the fifty daughters of Doris and Nereus, resulting more famously in the whale-like Cetus ravaging the shores of Ethiopia. After consulting an oracle with her husband Cepheus, this figure chained up her daughter as a sacrifice to the sea monster. For 10 points, name this mother of Andromeda.

ANSWER: Cassiopeia

Result: 1823 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 18.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 4761

Question: This daughter of King Iasos gave birth to Parthenopaios, one of the Seven Against Thebes. This woman killed two centaurs named Rhoecus and Hylaeus. After a man killed her uncles Plexippus and Toxeus, he died when his mother burned the stick that was tied to his life. In another story, this woman and her lover made love in a temple of Cybele's, prompting her to turn them into lions. This woman joined Meleager in the Calydonian boar hunt, and only married after Hippomenes begged Aphrodite to help him beat her at a contest. For 10 points, name this huntress who married Hippomenes after he beat her in a footrace with the help of golden apples.

ANSWER: Atalanta [accept Atlanta]

Result: 1824 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 19.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 11969

Question: In one myth, this deity's mother fasted for a year so he could be born, but he did not assume his present form until Shani looked at him. This deity slashed the face of the moon after it laughed at him for using a serpent to bandage up his sweet-filled stomach. In similar myths, this figure was consoled by Narada, became the commander of the celestial armies, and outsmarted his brother Skanda in a contest to circumnavigate the world three times. This figure did not allow Shiva to enter his house, and so Shiva decapitated him. For 10 points, name this remover of obstacles in Hinduism, a god whose decapitated head was replaced by that of an elephant.

ANSWER: Ganesha [or Ganapati; or Vinayaka; or Pillaiyar; or Vighnesha; or Vighneshvara]

Result: 1825 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 2.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 12001

Question: In one myth system, these animals were treated well for one year and eaten, causing them to be transported to the realm of Kim-un Kamui. After becoming a human by praying for 100 days, one of them mated with Hwanung to birth the first Korean emperor. Another encouraged Hanuman to fly across the ocean to find Sita in the Ramayana. In addition to Jambavantha and the one whose sinews were used to make Gleipnir, one was placed on an altar during a feast held by Lycaon before trying to kill his mother, a nymph of Artemis who became one after being seduced by Zeus. For 10 points, name this animal represented by Callisto, who was made into Ursa Major.

ANSWER: bears

Result: 1826 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 20.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 12024

Question: The aconite plant was formed after this figure's saliva hit rocky ground. In the Aeneid, the Cumaean Sybil threw this creature a cake laced with drugs, enabling Aeneas to visit Anchises. Auxiliary features of this creature included a snake's tail and a mane of serpents. King Eurystheus cowered inside a jar upon seeing this brother of Orthrus, who could not pierce the skin of the Nemean Lion, enabling the hero wearing that skin to subdue it with his bare hands. The twelfth labor of Heracles was to capture this creature alive. For 10 points, name this guardian of the underworld in Greek and Roman mythology, a dog usually depicted with three heads.

ANSWER: Cerberus

Result: 1827 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 3.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 12046

Question: One of these daughters of Thaumas and Electra gave birth to the immortal horses Bailus and Xanthus after sleeping with Zephyrus. They were driven to the Strophades by Calais and Zetes, who spared them because of pleas made by their sister Iris. These beings, whose members included Podarges, Aello, Ocypete, and Celaeno, were sent by Zeus to torment a figure with too much prophetic power, which they did by snatching and befouling his food before he finished eating. The Argonauts learned the location of the Sympaglades after freeing King Phineus from, for 10 points, what half women, half birds from Greek myth?

ANSWER: harpies [or harpyiae]

Result: 1828 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 4.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 12061

Question: One aspect of this god was worshiped in an airtight cylindrical temple, represented all the cardinal directions, and blew the sun and moon into place. In one story, this god slept with his celibate priestess sister, burning himself to death in shame. This god's heart became the morning star, the twin brother of Venus. This god created the fifth cycle of mankind by letting blood flow from his penis into a meal of ground-up bones of previous races. This analogue of Kukulcan and rival of Tezcatlipoca was mistaken for a horse-riding conquistador. For 10 points, name this feathered serpent from Aztec mythology, who was mistaken for Hernan Cortes.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl [or White Tezcatlipoca, but do not accept or prompt on Tezcatlipoca itself]

Result: 1829 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 5.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 12081

Question: This figure recited an incantation over his sleeping wife to exchange faces with her. This god named his four brothers and briefly earned their ire because he was allowed to sleep in his mother's bed. In one version, he died when the laughter of a fan tail caused the ruler of the underworld to crush him between her legs. This god was wrapped in the top-knot of Taranga, then nursed by seaweed before proceeding to use a jaw-bone of his ancestor to beat the sun. This figure transformed Irawaru into a dog, which distressed his sister Hina. Known for using a fishhook to haul up islands in the Pacific, for 10 points, name this trickster in Polynesian myth.

ANSWER: Maui

Result: 1830 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 6.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 12111

Question: This figure ordered his men to advance in spite of an omen in which a red snake bit an eagle. His enemy recounted that this warrior would not advance beyond an oak tree by the Scaean gate. He fulfilled a prophecy by killing Protesilaus and engaged in another fight in the form of his brother Deiphobus. This figure's bronze helmet inspired tears in his son Astyanax, whom he embraced before killing an enemy wearing someone else's armor. This man was dragged behind his opponent's chariot as vengeance for killing Patroclus. For 10 points, name this husband of Andromache, a Trojan brother of Paris and warrior who was killed by Achilles.

ANSWER: Hector

Result: 1831 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 7.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 12135

Question: This object was named for the horse of a figure who used it as his gallows. A figure known as High related to Gangleri that bees fed on the honeydew that fell from it. In the Grimnismal, this object was said to be the noblest of its kind and to "suffer more agony more than men know," as it was assaulted by four harts. At the very top of this object lay an unnamed eagle between whose eyes sat the hawk Vedrfolnir. Though the Norns used water from the Well of Urd to heal this object, it suffered more from the dragon Nidhogg and the pesky squirrel Ratatoskr. Home to nine worlds, for 10 points, name this world tree of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Yggdrasil

Result: 1832 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 8.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 12147

Question: In one version of the myth concerning this figure, she was sprinkled with the juices of the aconite plant. Pliny notes that this figure pioneered the use of nets and linen and bore a son named Closter, who was the first to use the spindle. The forest nymphs stopped what they were doing when this daughter of Colophon, a dyer of Tyrian purple, performed her most famous action in spite of an old woman telling her to curb her pride. In spite of this, this figure depicted the infidelities of Zeus and hung herself in shame when she realized she could not hope to match Athena. For 10 points, name this weaver who was transformed into a spider.

ANSWER: Arachne

Result: 1833 | NASAT | 2010 | Round: 9.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 12168

Question: This deity touched the four cardinal points with her fingers and was held up by her father, whom she arched over. Depictions of this deity included a vase above her head and were located on the inside lids of sarcophagi, where she would watch over the deceased. On the three unlucky, one lucky, and one ambiguous days of the calendar, she gave birth to her children, one of whom entered her mouth in the evening and exited her vulva in the morning, and was thus born every day. This sky goddess had skin scattered with stars and she was the daughter of Shu and Tefnut. For 10 points, identify this mother of Isis and Osiris, the consort of Geb.

ANSWER: Nut

Result: 1834 | NTSS | 2010 | Round: 02.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 12211

Question: This figure became jealous when Canens was loved by Saturn and Venilia's son Picus (PIE-kuhs). She also purified the Argonauts after they murdered Apsyrtus (ap-SUR-tuhs). In another story, this goddess turned the bottom half of Scylla (SIL-uh) into a group of dogs because she was jealous over the love of Glaucus. Hermes (HER-mees) possessed a plant with a black root and white flower that protected people from this goddess, the mother of Telegonus and even- tual wife of Telemachus (teh-luh-MAH-kis). This resident of Aeaea (ee-EE-uh) instructed Odysseus how to listen to the Sirens. Name this enchantress who turns men into pigs.

ANSWER: Circe

Result: 1835 | NTSS | 2010 | Round: 05.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 12266

Question: The servants of this goddess, who moved so slowly that they always appeared to be still, are Ganglati and Ganglot. This goddess used a knife called Famine and a plate called Hunger, and she was the youngest offspring of Angrboda (AHN-gur-BOH-dah) and Loki (LOH-kee) after Fenrir and Jormungandr (YOR-mun-gahn-dur). After Odin kicked this goddess out of Asgard, she built her house Eljudnir in Niflheim (NIH-ful-haim). Because Thokk did not cry, this woman kept possession of Balder after he died. The name of this goddess is also the name of her location, which is where people went who died of disease or old age. Name this goddess whose name is still associated with a bad place to go after death.

ANSWER: Hela

Result: 1836 | NTSS | 2010 | Round: 06.pdf | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 12295

Question: Beings of this type cause the death of Svafrlami (sva-fir-LAH-mee) to avenge their slavery, and these creatures in- cluded Northri (NORTH-ree), Suthri, Austri, and Vestri, who upheld the heavenly dome and represented the four cardinal directions. Another one of these creatures is Andvari, who possesses the ring Andvarinaut that makes gold until it is taken by Loki (LOH-kee). The first two of these creatures were Motsognir and Durinn. One of them, Alviss, was tricked by Thor and turned to stone when he was exposed to sunlight. These beings were responsible for building Odin's spear Gungnir and Thor's hammer Mjolnir. Name these metal-workers who in later tales were por- trayed as being shorter than humans.

ANSWER: Dwarf [or Dwarves or Dvergar]

Result: 1837 | NTSS | 2010 | Round: 09.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 12346

Question: This person once visited shrines without seeing anybody praying and had to turn five crocodiles back into nymphs so that the shrines could be used again. In addition to the four brothers he knew of, this person had an illegitimate brother who claimed to be a Kshatriya so he could fight. This person killed that illegitimate brother Karna during the Kurukshetra War. At the beginning of that war, this archer turned down an army in order to have his charioteer be Krishna. Name this leader who was convinced by Krishna to fight even though his family members were on the other side in the dialogue that became known as the Bhagavad Gita.

ANSWER: Arjuna

Result: 1838 | NTSS | 2010 | Round: 10.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 12368

Question: This god was generally considered the father of gods worshiped at Samothrace and Lemnos, the Cabeiri. This god himself was either taken to Lemnos by Eurynome and Thetis after landing in the sea, or he landed directly on Lemnos after a long fall. Hera gave birth to this god as revenge for Zeus impregnating Metis, and one of this god's first acts was to split open Zeus's head after Zeus swallowed Metis, allowing Metis to give birth to Athena. This god wanted to marry Athena, but she refused because he was ugly and crippled. He eventually married Aphrodite, who he caught having an affair with Ares. Name this god who supposedly worked in Mount Etna, the god of fire and blacksmiths and the Greek equivalent of Vulcan.

ANSWER: Hephaestus [accept Vulcanus before "Vulcan"]

Result: 1839 | NTSS | 2010 | Round: 11.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 12381

Question: Though some sources claim that this woman's father was Phoenix, most sources claim that he was her brother and that he founded Phoenicia while looking for her. Her other brothers, who also named cities after themselves after searching for her, were Cilix, Thasus, and Cadmus. Her father Agenor was the King of Tyre. The gifts given to this woman include a dog named Laelaps, a perfect javelin, and a bronze guardian named Talos. This woman was taken to Crete and later gave birth to Sarpedon, Rhadamanthys, and Minos. Name this princess who was abducted by Zeus when he took the form of a white bull.

ANSWER: Europa

Result: 1840 | NTSS | 2010 | Round: replacement.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 12528

Question: This Greco-Roman god is often identified with the Egyptian god Min. The protector of sailors and fishermen, the best-known drawing of him is near the entrance of the House of the Vettii in Pompeii. Donkeys were sacrificed to this god because he killed a donkey that prevented him from raping Lotis. This god was cursed before birth by Hera be- cause she was jealous of his mother Aphrodite, so he was ugly and impotent. Statues of him often were placed next to gardens to help them grow. Name this male fertility god with large genitalia.

ANSWER: Priapus [or Priapos; or Mutunus Tutunus]

Result: 1841 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 12538

Question: One namesake of this figure inverted the direction of the Malapraha after turning it red and slaughtered members of the Haihiya-kshatriya caste 21 times. This figure had to be convinced that evil had no gender before killing Tadaka, and he ravished the oceans after Varuna failed to answer his prayers. He was aided by Vibhishana, whom he later crowned as king of (*) Lanka, while his brother Bharata kept this figure's sandals at the foot of his throne during his fourteen-year exile. He was often accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and an army largely consisting of Hanuman and his monkey followers. For 10 points, name this enemy of Ravana and husband of Sita, the protagonist of a namesake Indian epic.

ANSWER: Rama [or Ramachandra; accept Parashurama before "Tadaka"]

Result: 1842 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 10.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 12568

Question: In the Odyssey, Nestor sacrifices nine black bulls to this figure, reflecting this deity's importance at Pylos. After this figure saved Amymone from being raped by a satyr, he promptly carried her off for himself, fathering Naupilus. Another figure defiled by this deity, Caeneus, requested that this god change her into a man. This deity was the father of (*) Chrysaor and Pegasus by Medusa, and with Thoosa he fathered Polyphemus. This god sent two huge serpents to devour Laocoon and his sons, and he flooded Athens after losing a contest to Athena for the patronage of the city. For 10 points, name this trident-bearing husband of Amphitrite, the Greek god of earthquakes and the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon [or Neptune]

Result: 1843 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 11.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 12575

Question: This myth system includes two elderly deities who pose as dentists and replace a vain god's teeth with corn, causing him to die of shame. Other stories from this culture describe the defeat of that god's earthquake-controlling sons, one of whom was trapped while pursuing a crab after killing the Four Hundred Boys. The killers of those sons survived the Dark (*) House, the Cold House, and the Bat House, locations in this culture's underworld, which is ruled by One Death and Seven Death. God K is the personification of the axe of their rain god, Chaac. The trip taken by Hunahpu and Xbalanque (shba-LAN-kay), the Hero Twins, to Xibalba is detailed in this culture's Popul Vuh. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican culture that venerated deities at cities like Chichen Itza on the Yucatan.

ANSWER: Mayan mythology [accept word equivalents]

Result: 1844 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 12.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 12601

Question: At Brauron, the clothes of women who died in childbirth were dedicated to this figure. This figure, who Nicander and Stesichorus claimed to be the daughter of Helen and Theseus, is sometimes believed to have been wedded to Achilles at Leuce. Most sources claim that she was replaced by a bear or a calf in her most famous appearance, though Euripides relates how Pylades and her brother discovered that she was carried off to (*) Tauris to serve as a priestess of Artemis. It was Artemis who had earlier demanded that this figure's father offer her as sacrifice to enable his fleet to sail from Aulis. For 10 points, name this sister of Electra and Orestes, a daughter of Clytemnestra and Agamemnon whom the latter sacrificed so that the Greek fleets could sail to Troy.

ANSWER: Iphigenia

Result: 1845 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 13.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 12615

Question: This god's son was married to Tashmetum, wore a horned cap, and could lengthen or diminish the lifespan of any human at will. This god tamed a winged serpent called the mushussu for that son, whose mother was this god's perpetually pregnant wife Sarpanit. This father of Nabu was the enemy of a figure whom he incapacitated with four (*) winds prior to raising the rain-flood and firing an arrow down that enemy's throat. This figure also defeated Kingu en route to obtaining Tablets of Destiny. This fifty-named deity was named king of the gods after his father Ea abdicated when this god defeated Tiamat. For 10 points, name this hero of the Enuma Elish, the patron deity of Babylon.

ANSWER: Bel Marduk

Result: 1846 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 14.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 12641

Question: This figure was born a day before Harmachis and was educated by his first prophet, a man named Pamyles. This deity's ba was worshipped separately as the ram god Banebdjet. The oxyrhyncus fish was cursed due to its interference in a ceremony involving this god who, like his precursor Andjety, wears the Atef crown. He was once (*) rescued from a palace in Byblos, where a pillar had been made of the cedar tree he had become trapped in. This god became the ruler of Duat, the underworld, after being imprisoned in a box and then cut into thirteen pieces by his rival. Wielding a crook and flail and killed by his brother Set, for 10 points, identify this Egyptian god who fathered Horus with his wife, Isis.

ANSWER: Osiris [or Usiris; or Asari; or Aser; or Ausir; or Wesir; or Usire; or Ausare]

Result: 1847 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 15.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 12656

Question: One figure of this name owned a five-cubit-long pet dragon and met his death after being shipwrecked on either the Capharean Rocks or the Whirling Rocks. Another figure of this name was made mostly invulnerable after being wrapped in Heracles's lion skin. The former figure of this name earned the ire of Athena after sullying her temple by (*) raping Cassandra in it, while the latter owned a seven-layered shield that he used to shelter his half-brother Teucer. That second figure fathered Eurysaces with Tecmessa and flayed several cows and sheep after losing the armor of Achilles to Odysseus and going insane. For 10 points, identify this name shared by sons of Oileus and Telamon, known as the Lesser and the Greater.

ANSWER: Ajax [accept Aias or Aivas at any time; accept Ajax the Lesser or Oilean Ajax or Locrian Ajax before Salamis is read]

Result: 1848 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 16.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 12673

Question: This character discovered his true name under a metal slab after chasing off the Copper Knight and taking over the castle of Joyous Guard. This man, who once talked Galehaut into surrendering, defeated a pair of illusory lions by crossing the Sword Bridge to the land of Gorre after earlier gaining a nickname by jumping into a dwarf-driven cart. He defeated Claudas to recover the kingdom of his father, King (*) Ban of Medwick, and slew Meleagant in a duel. This cousin of Bors and Lionel embarks on the Grail Quest along with Perceval and his son by Elaine of Corbenic, Galahad. For 10 points, name this knight who carried on a long affair with Guinevere, the greatest Knight of the Round Table.

ANSWER: Sir Lancelot du Lac [or Launcelot; or the White Knight]

Result: 1849 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 17.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 12695

Question: A now-lost source relates a story in which this god was pierced by a man's head, leading to a new kenning for the word "sword." This figure visited the islands of Vagasker and Singasteinn to fight another deity in the form of a seal in order to retrieve a necklace. This deity lives in the so-called "Heavenly Mountain," Himinbjorg, and he also owns the sword Hofund and rides the horse Gulltop. This god is said to have slept with Edda, Amma, and Modir while under the name (*) Rig; those women then gave birth the ancestors of the three races of man, Thrall, Karl, and Jarl. This golden-toothed son of nine mothers will kill and be killed by Loki after blowing the Gjallarhorn to signal the beginning of Ragnarok. For 10 points, identify this Aesir guardian of the rainbow bridge Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdallr [or Hallinskidi; or Gullintani; or Vindhler]

Result: 1850 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 18.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 12708

Question: In the Stargate series, this figure renounced ascension and created the Ark of Truth as well as a weapon used to wipe out the Ori. In another fictional appearance, he leaves for Bermuda in a huff after arguing with a student, having earlier defeated Madam Mim in the form of a purple dragon. That appearance also sees him illustrate a somewhat disturbing lesson about love using squirrels with the aid of his pet owl, (*) Archimedes. A dragon voiced by John Hurt advises this character, played by Colin Morgan, in a television show re-imagining his youth with characters like Morgana at the court of Uther Pendragon. The villain in A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court, for 10 points, identify this legendary builder of Stonehenge, a famous wizard from Arthurian myth.

ANSWER: Merlinus Ambrosius [or Myrrdin Emrys]

Result: 1851 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 18.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 12716

Question: One of this figure's sons became the father of Italus after accidentally killing his own father with the spine of a stingray. This figure lusted after a youth who was preoccupied with the singer Canens; after being spurned by that youth, Picus, this figure turned him into a woodpecker. This mythological figure purified the Argonauts for their murder of Aspyrtus and, out of jealous love for Glaucus, turned (*) Scylla into a monster. This daughter of Perse and Helios became the mother of Agrius, Latinus, and Telegonus by a man who initially used the herb moly to resist her advances. Eurylochus warns that man of the dangers posed by this woman, who rules the island of Aeaea. For 10 points, identify this sorceress who famously transformed some of Odysseus's men into swine.

ANSWER: Circe [or Kirke]

Result: 1852 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 19 Finals I.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 12732

Question: Svafrlami once trapped two of these figures near a large rock, allowing him to secure Tyrfing from them. The heavenly dome created from Ymir's skull is held up by a quartet of them named for the cardinal directions. Two of these figures murdered Gilling and his wife and then paid off their victims' son Suttung with the mead of Kvasir. They live in (*) Nidavellir, which is ruled by their king Hreidmar. In addition to the aforementioned Fjalar and Galar and Dvalinn and Duri, their ranks include Ivaldi and his sons, as well as Brokk and Sindri, who created Gullinbursti, Draupnir, and Mjolnir in their forge. Closely related to the svartalfar, or dark elves, for 10 points, name this characteristically diminutive race from Norse myth.

ANSWER: dwarves [or dvergar; or dwarf; or dvergr; prompt on svartalfar or dark elves before mention]

Result: 1853 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 12744

Question: Erigone killed herself after one of these named Marea found her father Icarius dead. The poisonous plant aconite was created from one of these animals, while another of these creatures was given as a gift to Procris by Minos after she cured him of an ailment that caused him to ejaculate scorpions. That creature had earlier been given to Europa by Zeus along with Talos and a javelin that never missed its mark and was named (*) Laelaps. One of these animals guarded the cattle of Geryon, while another one was the first creature to recognize Odysseus after he returned to Ithaca. Orthros and Argus are examples of, or 10 points, what type of animal also exemplified by the three-headed Cerberus?

ANSWER: dogs [prompt on canines; do not accept "wolves"]

Result: 1854 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 20 Finals II.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 12767

Question: This deity vowed to bring fifteen hundred people into the world every day after another deity vowed to kill a thousand. He once rolled a gigantic boulder into a mountain pass and turned his headdress into a bunch of grapes and his comb into bamboo shoots to delay that counterpart's actions. He also came across a peach tree whose fruit he threw to fend off eight thunder gods and a group of (*) shikome on a journey sparked by the sight of his wife's maggot-eaten body. This owner of the spear Amenonuhoko hacked up his son Kagustuchi, whose fiery birth had killed his wife. After escaping from Yomi, he performed misogi, which resulted in the birth of his children Tsukuyomi, Susano'o, and Amaterasu. For 10 points, identify this Shinto creator god, the male counterpart of Izanami.

ANSWER: Izanagi-no-Mikoto [do not accept "Izanami"]

Result: 1855 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 21AllStar.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 12789

Question: One of this man's sons shares his name with a Zeus-fathered king of Samothrace; that son, Emathion, ruled in Arabia until being killed by Heracles. Another son of this man led an army that turned into birds upon his death and engendered Achilles's rage by slaying Nestor's son Antilochus. This figure was bribed with a golden vine by his half-brother Priam in order to send that son, (*) Memnon of Ethiopia, to fight in the Trojan War. This son of Laomedon became the consort of the mother of the winds, who eventually sealed him in a room after realizing the implications of praying to Zeus for his immortality, but not his eternal youth. For 10 points, identify this consort of Eos who eventually became a cicada.

ANSWER: Tithonus [or Tithonos]

Result: 1856 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 23 Tie Breaker II.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 12826

Question: One deity is required to cross the Kormt, the Ormt, and the two Kerlaug rivers in order to reach this place. One source makes mention of Mimameid, which may be cognate with this place; another possible cognate is the home of Eikthyrnir and Heidrun, Laerad. Dain, Duneyr, Durathror, and Dvalin are the names of four harts that live in this location, whose depths lie near the snake-filled spring Hvergelmir and the (*) wells of Urd and Mimir. An unnamed eagle and the hawk Vedrfolnir live at its top, while the serpent Nidhogg lives at its bottom; messages between those extremes are relayed by the squirrel Ratatosk. Odin once hung himself from, for 10 points, what world tree in Norse myth?

ANSWER: Yggdrasil [accept the world tree before mention; accept the Well of Urd or Urdarbrunnr before "Mimameid" is read; accept Mimameidr or Laeradr until mention]

Result: 1857 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 24 Tie Breaker III.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 12857

Question: The goddess of this name lives in a silver-columned grotto and is married to a son of Crius and Eurybia by whom she is the mother of Zelus, Cratos, Bia, and Nike. This wife of Pallas was the first immortal to assist Zeus during the Titanomachy. This goddess, the daughter of either Erebus and Nyx or Oceanus and Tethys, is the personification and namesake of a landmark that is visited by Iris whenever a god wishes to (*) swear the most solemn oath possible. It was either here or the Acheron where Charon performed his duties, and it was submersion in this body that made Achilles invincible. For 10 points, name this mythological river that forms the boundary between Earth and Hades.

ANSWER: the River Styx

Result: 1858 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 25 Emergency.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 12870

Question: Kutkh, a recurring figure in the myths of Kamchatka natives and the Chukchi people, takes the form of this animal. A story from Haida myth describes how one of these figures freed women from a chiton after freeing men from a clam; that story was depicted in a Bill Reid sculpture named for this figure "and the First Men." The name of Bran the Blessed, a character from the Mabinogion, translates as this type of creature. Morrigan assumes this shape for some sexual encounters, and two of them leave (*) Hlidskjalf every morning, gather the news of the world, and return to Odin; those two are named "thought" and "memory," or Hugin and Munin. For 10 points, identify this animal, a popular trickster figure among tribes of the Pacific Northwest, which is often conflated with its smaller relative, the crow.

ANSWER: raven [accept crow until mentioned due to conflation]

Result: 1859 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 12890

Question: This figure was ejected from a feast after killing Fimafeng, though after conversing with Eldir he returned to engage in a series of flytings. While traveling with Odin and Hoenir, this figure's staff became stuck to the giant Thiazi, from whom this deity later rescued Idunn. His son Narfi was disemboweled and had his entrails used to (*) bind this figure to a rock, where poison eternally drips on him and occasionally triggers earthquakes when not caught by his wife Sigyn. In the form of a mare, he mated with Svadilfari to mother Sleipnir, while his children with Angrboda include Fenrir. Punished for a scheme that led to Hodur killing Baldur, for 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki Laufeyarson

Result: 1860 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 12899

Question: Cimon claimed to have found this man's bones at Scyros, where this figure was killed by Lycomedes after he was exiled by Menestheus. According to Plutarch, this grandson of Pittheus fathered Melanippus by raping the future wife of Deioneus, Perigune. On the way to his hometown, this hero killed Coryphetes, (*) Sciron, and several other criminals. After abandoning his first wife on Naxos, he later married that woman's sister, Phaedra, whose suicide forced him to kill his own son, Hippolytus. In order to prevent the sacrifice of fourteen Athenian youths, he traveled to Crete and conquered the Labyrinth with the aid of Ariadne. For 10 points, name this founder of Athens and slayer of the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 1861 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 12936

Question: In a Japanese myth, one of these creatures disguised himself as a boy named Kintaro in order to trap Minamoto no Raiko. A god who takes this form has a brother named Iya and is the son of Inyan; that god is the Lakota trickster Iktomi. One of these animals brought a python, a leopard, a dwarf, and some hornets to the sky god to secure the release of all of the world's (*) stories. That son of Asase Ya also hoarded the world's wisdom in a calabash. A daughter of Idmon of Colophon, a Tyrian dye-maker, hung herself and became one of these creatures after depicting the gods' infidelities on her loom, which was destroyed by Athena. For 10 points, name this type of animal represented by Anansi and the weaver Arachne.

ANSWER: spiders [accept specific forms, just to be safe]

Result: 1862 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 12956

Question: One of this figure's suitors, the son of a Garamantian nymph and Jupiter Ammon, was the Gaetulian king Iarbas. The isoperimetric problem is sometimes named for this figure, a reference to the hill of Byrsa, which this figure encircled with strips of ox-hide. This daughter of Belus lost her husband Sychaeus, prompting her to (*) flee from her murderous brother Pygmalion. She fell in love with a visitor to her palace after Venus sent Cupid, disguised as that visitor's father Ascanius, to sit on her lap. Also known as Elissa, for 10 points, name this queen of Carthage, who killed herself on a funeral pyre after she was spurned by Aeneas.

ANSWER: Dido [accept Elissa before mentioned]

Result: 1863 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 12977

Question: The city of Abdera was founded in honor of a man who died during a plot against one figure of this name. That figure may have resulted from Atlas' incestuous relations with Asteria, but most sources refer to him as the son of Cyrene and Ares. Another man of this name, the son of Deipyle, was one of the Epigoni who fought alongside Sthenelus and Euryalus, killed Pandarus, and knocked Aeneas down in single combat. That warrior was a favorite of (*) Athena, who helped him to wound both Ares and Aphrodite. For 10 points, identify this son of Tydeus, who shares his name with a king of the Bistones who was the object of Heracles' eighth labor and the owner of some flesh-eating mares.

ANSWER: Diomedes

Result: 1864 | PACE NSC | 2010 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 12996

Question: This goddess told the women of the Winnili to cover their faces with their hair so her husband would grant them victory over the Vandals. One of this deity's servants runs errands using the horse Hofvarpnir and is called Gna. This resident of the marshy hall Fensalir is also attended by her sister Fulla. After (*) Thokk thwarted a campaign by this goddess, Hermod offered Hel a ransom at the behest of this figure, who had overlooked mistletoe while seeking oaths to protect her son. Loki once accused this goddess of sleeping with her husband's brothers Vili and Ve. For 10 points, identify this mother of Hodr and Baldur who rules over the Aesir alongside her husband Odin.

ANSWER: Frigg [or Frigga; do not accept "Freya"]

Result: 1865 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Brown A + Missouri State.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 13021

Question: One story about this deity tells of how, in the form of a horse, he mated with the mares of Erichthonious, resulting in the birth of twelve horses who could run over waves. Honored by Athenians as a relative after an apparently successful invocation of his help against a Persian fleet, this god had serpent-tails for feet and resided in a cave on Mount Haemus. The most famous story about this god tells of how he abducted the daughter of Erechtheus, Oreithyia, on whom he fathered the daughters Chione and Cleopatra, as well as the twin sons Calais and Zetes. For 10 points, identify this deity who together with Notus, Eurus, and Zephyrus was responsible for one of the four cardinal directions, the Greek god of the north wind.

ANSWER: Boreas

Result: 1866 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Cheyne-Byrne.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 13063

Question: The Etruscan deity of this phenomenon wears a large pileus and is omitted from the liver of Piacenza; that god is Sethlans. The Hindu deity of this phenomenon was forced by Indra to be born as the sage Agasthya. Another diety of this phenomenon was cut into 8 separate gods after killing his mother during birth. That Hindu deity is married to Svaha. The Greek deity of this phenomenon saved Achilles from drowning in the river Scamander. Over two hundred Vedic hymns are dedicated to the Hindu god of this classical element, whose face is often smeared with butter; that god is Agni. The Greek god associated with this element became lame after landing on Lemnos after falling for nine days and nine nights. For 10 points, name this element associated with the forge god Hephaestus.

ANSWER: Fire

Result: 1867 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Columbia A + Michigan A.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 13099

Question: With Halia, this figure fathered the six Eastern Demons who haunt the caves of Rhodes. During the Gigantomachy, this figure crushed Polybotus with the island of Kos. One of this figure's daughters was a queen of Libya transformed into a child-devouring monster by Hera; that daughter was Lamia. He turned Caenis into a male warrior after raping her. Along with Apollo, this figure built the walls of Troy for Laomedon. This figure and Aegeus both slept with Aethra in the same night, resulting in the birth of Theseus. He cursed Cecrops after that king made Athena the patron of Athens. Often called the Earthshaker, this god married Amphitrite, with whom he fathered Triton. For 10 points, name this Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 1868 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Harvard A.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 13121

Question: Inscriptions on the islands of Ios and Andros indicate that this deity laid down laws for mankind, and governs Sothis.

ANSWER:

Result: 1869 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Illinois A.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 13144

Question: Soiem versions of this figure's story have her being slain in a battle against the Argives, while other versions of that same myth have this character turned to stone by King Perseus. With this person's second lover, she begat the sons Thoas, Staphylos, Oinopion, and Peparethos, although other accounts give this figure as having additional sons with Staphylos. This figure ascended to Olympus after marrying Dionysus After this figure resided for a time on an island, she was rescued by her husband, but before that, she assisted her first lover in slaying a minotaur and escaping from a labyrinth. For ten points, name this daughter of Minos, a Cretan princess who was abandoned by Theseus on Naxos.

ANSWER: Ariadne

Result: 1870 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Illinois B + Brown B.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 13157

Question: One form of this god gets his toes cut off after rejecting an offer of gruel but accepting a bribe of a gold ring in ferrying an old crone to an island. Anti or Nemty was a personification of this god, who was regarded as a savior or a child in the form of Shed. In art, this god wore a single lock of hair on the right side of his had and was sometimes seated on a lotus with a finger in his mouth. In one story, this deity painted a wooden boat to resemble stone so that his rival's boat would sink in a race. That rival once consumed a piece of lettuce with this god's semen on it, allowing for the gods to proclaim him victor. This Wedjat-bearing deity was conceived with a golden phallus and ripped off a testicle off his rival, explaining the infertility of the desert. Set was constantly foiled by, for 10 points, what falcon-headed Egyptian god, whose human form was embodied by the pharaohs?

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 1871 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Maryland A.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 13172

Question: During a visit to his parents' hall, this figure finds his grandmother with 900 heads, and his father catches two whales using oxen as bait. That visit is made by this figure and Thor, who is unable to break a glass cup until he throws it at the head of this figure's father, as recounted in the

ANSWER:

Result: 1872 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Minnesota Reunion Bowl.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 13200

Question: One story claims that this deity was born after another god delivered some falling pudding to his mother. Another story asserts that he gained mercy from Shani after crushing that god into the ceiling. After fighting his offspring at the gates of Patala, he blew out five lamps simultaneously to defeat the magician Mahiravana. He once voluntarily submitted to Indrajit's use of the Brahmastra, and at a different time he picked up the entire mountain Dronagiri while attempting to find the herb Sanjivani. In one story, Sita gives him a necklace for his reverence which this figure proceeds to dismantle. This figure was struck by Indra's thunderbolt after attempting to eat a mango that was actually the sun. For 10 points, identify this figure who helped Rama rescue Sita in the

ANSWER: Hanuman

Result: 1873 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Princeton A.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 13220

Question: This man's wet-nurse, Caieta, was buried along a beach in Hesperia. He gave refuge to Anna Perenna, the sister of his former lover. This man's companions included Cloanthus and Ilioneus. His opponents included Menzentius and Queen Camilla in a war occurring because this man was promised the hand of Lavinia, a daughter of Latinus whose suitors included this man's enemy in that war, a Rutulian named Turnus. This man went to the Sybil of Cumae to see his father Anchises in the underworld, which he accomplished with the aid of the golden bough. He may be more famous for an affair that saw a queen throw herself upon a pyre after this man left Carthage for good. For 10 points, name this father of Ascanius who fled Troy to found Rome, falling in love with Dido along the way.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 1874 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Rice.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 13247

Question: This event was made possible by a curse laid on the men of one country by the wife of Crundchu when she was made to run a race against horses while pregnant. That curse rendered all the warriors in that kingdom but one incapable of action when this event occurred. Participants in this action included a wizard and his twenty-seven sons, collectively known as the Clan Calatin, and a warrior who wields a rainbow sword that can slice the tops off of hills. Those warriors do battle with a champion who earlier unknowingly killed his son in an incident reminiscent of the tale of Rostam and Sohrab, and had gone to learn how to use a barbed spear from a warrior-woman named Skatha. That hero single-handedly fought the forces of Connaght until the other warriors of Ulster broke free of the curse of Macha. For ten points, name this incident of the Ulster cycle in which the forces of Queen Maev did battle with Cuchulainn as they went to steal its namesake Brown Bull.

ANSWER: Tain Bo Cuilaigne

Result: 1875 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Rutgers NB + Chicago A.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 13263

Question: After this figure was denied a prophecy from the Delphic oracle, he attempted to steal the tripod in order to start his own oracle. This figure killed all the sons of Neleus except Nestor, who refuses to tell of this figure's exploits in the

ANSWER: Herakles

Result: 1876 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: VCU.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 13278

Question: In ancient Rome, cakes were offered to Summanus, a deity associated with this phenomenon, and another deity of this type left behind rocks known as his "arrows" after fighting a water serpent that kidnaps his wife and children. Besides that enemy of Veles, the Norse deity of this phenomenon was only able to wrestle an old woman named Elli to one knee. A Greek god of this entity was able to manifest it after releasing the Cyclopes from Tartarus, who brought him the standard bearers of this, which were previously hidden by Gaia. Another deity linked to this phenomenon is slated to die from Jormungand's poison and may it with his hammer Mjollnir. For 10 points, name this weather phenomenon associated with such gods as Perun, Thor, and Zeus and often paired with lightning.

ANSWER: gods of

Result: 1877 | Penn Bowl | 2010 | Round: Yale A + Chicago B.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 13305

Question: This figure takes fire from the belly of a fish and gives it to mankind. This figure accomplishes a certain task by finding spells in the stomach of Antero Vipunen. While this figure, who spent 730 years in his mother's womb, is building a wooden boat, Hiisi causes this figure's axe to slip and hit his knee, and a river of blood gushes forth. This man caused Jouhkahainen to sink into a bog during a singing contest and created the Kantele from the bones of a pike. Seeking to marry the maiden of Pohjohla, which is ruled by Louhi, this companion of Lemminkainen enlists the help of Ilmarinen to create the Sampo. For 10 points, name this bard of Finnish myth, the central figure of the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Vainamoinen

Result: 1878 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: Bentley.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 13335

Question: Dupuis traced the characteristics of St. Peter back to the ancient mythology of this deity, including both figures' associations with a rod. A temple devoted to this deity in Argiletum has his hands pointed in a position some say maybe represents the number 355, and he was once associated with Ani. This deity claimed that he used to be called Chaos because he was "of the first world", and in one story, he successfully pursues Cardea. Sometimes called Clusius or Patulcius in ancient times,

ANSWER: Janus

Result: 1879 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: BSUNotreDame.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 13357

Question: The Aborigines consider the morning star Barnumbirr to be one of these, while the owl-headed Muut is this figure to the Cahuilla tribe. Animals associated with these include dolphins to the Romans and horses to the Celts and Teutons. The Inuit consider the Aurora Borealis to be flickering torchlights lit by these figures, while in Japanese mythology, one of these figures, Jizo, hides children under his robe to save them from having to wait on the shores of the Sanzu River for all eternity. Xolotl from Aztec mythology helps in the crossing of a jaguar-filled river of blood and a field filled with flying knives on the journey to Mictlan. Their collective name, literally meaning "guide of souls," is derived from the epithet of one of their most well-known examples, Hermes. For 10 points, name these figures whose function is to escort the souls of the dead to the afterlife, represented in Norse mythology by the Valkyries.

ANSWER: psychopomps [also accept "guides of the dead" or anything similar until "guide of souls" is read. Do not accept "Death"]

Result: 1880 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: ColumbiaC.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 13415

Question: As part of an effort to destroy the demon Taraka, he caught one god's semen in his mouth. The gods Trita and Surya are said to be aspects of this god, who has seven tongues that are used to eat ghee, and seven arms. His rival and twin brother in some traditions is Indra, who was born with this deity from the breath of the creator Prajapati. He is sometimes depicted on a chariot drawn by parrots, but when depicted as riding on a ram, he is usually shown carrying a fan, an ax, a torch, and a ladle. He serves as the messenger god as well as the god of sacrifices, saved Hanuman from Ravana in the Ramayama, and is forever young because he is reborn every time sticks are rubbed together. For 10 points, name this Hindu god of fire.

ANSWER: Agni

Result: 1881 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: Delaware.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 13438

Question: While king of Epirus, he arbitrated the dispute between Odysseus and the families of the suitors of Penelope, and regained control of Phthia from Acastus after his grandfather was exiled. In Epirus he abducted Lanassa, a granddaughter of Hercules and fathered eight children with her. His children Molossus, Pielus, and Pergamus were fathered with his prize Andromache after the fall of Troy, but his later desire for the hand of Hermione led to war with Orestes, who eventually killed him in the temple of Delphi. During the Trojan War, he journeyed with Odysseus to Lemnos to retrieve Philoctetes, and killed Priam in the temple of Zeus. After arriving at Troy, he was presented with the armor of his father, which Ajax had killed himself over after losing a contest to Odysseus. For 10 points, name this man conceived while his father posed as a girl at the court of King Lycomedes, the son of Achilles.

ANSWER: Neoptolemus [accept Pyrrhus]

Result: 1882 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: Editors1.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 13466

Question: Among the first challenges faced by his reign was a child-eating fox sent by Dionysus that could outrun all dogs. He purified Amphitryon and Alcmena for the death of Electryon, and later gave his daughter in marriage to their son. That daughter, Megara, was unfortunately married to Hercules, who later killed her in a fit of rage. During his second reign, his son Menoeceus committed suicide in order to save their city. As a consequence of a decree he made regarding treatment of enemies, war broke out between his city and Athens, at the end of which he was killed by Theseus. As another consequence of that decree, his son's fiancee, son, and wife all committed suicide in succession. Most of his problems began when he unknowingly married his sister Jocasta off to her son after the death of the Sphinx. For 10 points, name this man who forbade the burial of Polynices, ruled Thebes before and after Oedipus, and is the primary antagonist in Antigone.

ANSWER: Creon

Result: 1883 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: Illinois.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 13493

Question: A messenger is sent to inform the title character of "an unholy, horrible thing" in this work. A command to "not unstop the wineskin's neck" convinces one character in this work to visit the title character. The title character extracts an oath from that infertile king, Aegeus, which allows the title character to give "a dress / of soft weave and a coronet of beaten gold" to another character in this story, as well as pursue an action that the nurse had previously criticized, wondering "Babes, with their father's sin? Why call thy curse on these?" That dress was made with poison which causes the deaths of the king of Corinth, Creon, and his daughter, Glauce. For 10 points, what is this Euripides tragedy that sees the title character kill her children to enact revenge on her husband, Jason?

ANSWER: Medea

Result: 1884 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: MarylandA.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 13529

Question: In Zoroastrianism, a goddess of this took from the primeval bull the essence of all living animals and in Ainu myth, a former goddess of this gave up her domain after being ashamed of seeing the adultery of man. In addition to Maonghah and Chup Kamui, another deity ruling over this killed Ume Mochi, the goddess of food, after being disgusted by the way a meal was created. This object is said to have been created after the mutilation and decapitation of Coyolxauhqui in Aztec myth and the Mesopotamian god of it is Sin. A rice cake-making rabbit is associated with this entity in Chinese and Japanese folklore and Thoth once played draughts against this entity to increase the length of the calendar. Devoured by Hati at Ragnarok, For 10 points, identify this celestial body that is ruled by the Greek goddesses Hecate and Selene and the Roman goddess Luna.

ANSWER: the moon

Result: 1885 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: MichiganA.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 13536

Question: Loki and Heimdall fought each other in the form of these creatures in the ocean, while a group of people evolve into human-like forms of these creatures after shipwrecking in Kurt Vonnegut's Galapagos. Lake Ladoga is home to a ringed variety of this species of animal, while the Nerpa ones are unique to Lake Baikal. The daughter of the Inuit creator god is most closely associated with these animals, and in one story Sedna's severed fingers became whales, walruses, and these creatures. In Celtic myth, Selkies could transform from these into humans on land and transformed back by reattaching their skins. For 10 points, name this cute aquatic mammal that is often snacked upon by killer whales and clubbed to death and eaten as a delicacy by Canadians.

ANSWER: Seals

Result: 1886 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: MichiganA.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 13542

Question: This figure, the husband of Cifga, was once tricked into trading a herd of pigs for twelve enchanted mushrooms; in the war that ensued, he was killed by a son of Don. Along with Manawydan, he successively took up saddlery, shieldmaking, and shoemaking, but each time was driven off by angry Englishmen for being too good at his trade. This figure's foster-father, Teyrnon, originally named him Gwri for his golden hair. While hunting a white boar, this hero entered a magic castle, where he touched a golden bowl and instantly became stuck. Shortly after being born, this hero disappeared, causing his mother's handmaidens to smear her mouth with a puppy's blood and claim she had eaten the baby. For 10 points, identify this son of Pwyll and Rhiannon, who appears in all four branches of the Mabinogion.

ANSWER: Pryderi

Result: 1887 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: MichiganB.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 13571

Question: When depicted in art, this figure was often paired with a hoop or a rooster, a gift from his most famous lover. Some sources postulate that his father was not the son of Erichthonius of Dardania, but rather Laomedon, making this figure the brother of Tithonus and Priam. It is usually agreed, however, that he was the son of Tros, who was given a golden vine and two divine horses for his mourning. One variant of the popular story involving him includes Eos abducting Tithonus and him and both obtaining eternal life, but Tithonus was unfortunate and did not receive eternal youth. The more popular variant, however, is that he was on Mount Ida when he was abducted by an eagle and taken to Mount Olympus, where he replaced Hebe. For 10 points, name this youth from Greek mythology whose beauty was so pure that he was chosen by Zeus to be a cupbearer for the gods.

ANSWER: Ganymede

Result: 1888 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: Penn.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 13590

Question: This figure was given Arkhe's iridescent wings as a gift by Zeus, and when Dionysus was expelled by Lycurgus, he took refuge with this figure. She was tied up by her future husband and proceeded to change into flame, water, and a lioness before consenting to marry him. She once brought Briareus to Olympus to untie Zeus, and with Euronyme, she saved and sheltered Hephaestus after his fall from Olympus. During her wedding on Mount Pelion, her husband was given an ashen spear and the immortal horses Balius and Xanthus. Prophesized to give birth to a son greater than his father, she was married off to Peleus. This figure dipped that son into the River Styx by his heels to make him invulnerable. For 10 points, name this sea nymph, the mother of Achilles.

ANSWER: Thetis

Result: 1889 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: RutgersNB.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 13614

Question: In the English tale of King Horn, one of these objects is given to Horn by Rymenhild, who says that whenever he looks upon it, he will be prevented from going mad in battle or suffering from any hit. In one myth, Elatha gave one of these objects to Eriu so that he might later recognize his son by her, Bres, and in an Egyptian story, one of these objects caused Nemty to lose his talons, after Isis, disguised as a hag, used it to bribe him into bringing her to an island. One of these objects was cursed, resulting in the death of Hreidmar, who received it in turn for the death of his own son Otr. Andvari cursed one of these objects when he was forced to give it up to Loki and eventually that example of one of these objects is given to Brynhildr by Sigurd. Another of these objects, which is able to replicate itself on every ninth night, is owned by Odin. Draupnir is an example of, for 10 points, what type of jewelry?

ANSWER: Ring

Result: 1890 | Princeton Buzzerfest | 2010 | Round: UWashA.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 13627

Question: One tale recounts how as a youth this figure put a javelin through the eye of Ither, allowing him to obtain his first suit of armor. That victory was helped by his early mentor Gurnemanz. This man failed to bed the owner of a ship that appeared to him after he saw a red cross on the pommel of his unsheathed sword. This nephew of the Queen of the Wastelands once married a woman sometimes named Condwiramurs, and broke a sword fighting against his half-brother, Feirefiz. He accomplished his most famous action with Sir Bors and a man who once sat at the Siege Perilous. In one account, this figure fails to ask a question that will save the Fisher King. The namesake of a 13th century poem by Wolfram von Eschenbach that provided inspiration for a Wagner opera, for 10 points, name this Knight of the Round Table who, along with Galahad, obtained the Holy Grail.

ANSWER: Perceval

Result: 1891 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 01.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 13639

Question: This deity is identified with the crocodile god Khenty-khety, and tricked his rival into eating semen and raced him in a boat made of fake stone. Conceived either by a golden phallus or by divine fire, he bit off that rival's genitals, explaining why the desert is infertile. His eyes represented the sun and moon, and Wedjat was associated with this god, the patron of the pharaohs. His left eye, a symbol of protection, was torn out by his evil uncle Set. For 10 points, name this falcon-headed Egyptian sky god, a son of Isis and Osiris.

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 1892 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 02.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 13664

Question: This deity defended Gefjon in the Lokasenna, and tricked Baugi to obtain Kvasir's blood. This brother of Ve and Villi could see the whole universe from his throne, Hlidskjalf [HLEED-skee-alf]. He hung from Yggdrasil [IGG-druh-sill] for nine days, and possessed the severed head of Mimir and the ring Draupnir. Sacrificing an eye to drink from Mimir's well, his offspring include Vidar and the blind god Hodr, who was later tricked into killing his other son Baldr. This god rode Sleipnir and owned two ravens named Hugin and Munin. For 10 points, name this chief Norse god.

ANSWER: Odin

Result: 1893 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 03.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 13695

Question: One incarnation of this deity, Vigh

ANSWER: Ganesha [accept Ganapati before mention, accept Vinakaya or Pillaiyar]

Result: 1894 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 04.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 13716

Question: This figure oversaw a boxing match between Dares and Entellus. Nursed by Caieta, he took the Lares and Penates with him, and encountered Dedalus carving reliefs on a column. He visited his father's spirit with the help of the Cumaean Sibyl. He became separated from Creusa while escaping with his son Ascanius and father Anchises, and his second wife Lavinia was the daughter of Latinus. This Trojan prince spurned the queen of Carthage, Dido, and his journey ended in the founding of Rome. For 10 points, name this subject of an epic poem by Vergil.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 1895 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 05.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 13734

Question: The all-black bull Mnevis was a manifestation of this deity, whose soul was represented by the Bennu bird. The grandfather of Geb and Nut, he fathered Tefnut and is either the husband or father of Hathor. In the form of a cat, he repeatedly slays an evil serpent. Riding a barge each night, he would defeat Apep, the demon of darkness, before turning back towards the east. He was sometimes combined with Atum, Horus, or Amun. For 10 points, name Egyptian sun god.

ANSWER: Ra or Re

Result: 1896 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 06.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 13752

Question: Two of this god's servants, bound into service for stealing bone marrow, were Roskva and Thialfi. When he rode his chariot, the earth was scorched and the mountains cracked, and when he visited the giants, he drank so much he caused tidal changes. He got his iron gloves, as well as his belt Megingjord and other magical gifts from a giantess, Gerd. This deity was married to Sif, and his offspring included Magni and Modi. He owns the largest hall in Asgard, Bilskirnir. For 10 points, name this Norse thunder god who killed giants with his hammer Mjolnir.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 1897 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 07.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 13773

Question: This figure came from Thessaly and married Camese, but later married the mother of Fontus, Juturna. He chased after the nymph Carna, and fathered a god who drowned in the Tiber, giving it its name. Ruling Latium during the Golden Age, he sheltered Saturn from Jupiter. This god prevented an invasion of the Sabines by flooding the gates, so in times of war, his temple doors were kept open. He was the god of doorways, beginnings, and ends. For 10 points, name this Roman god with two faces, the namesake of the first month of the year.

ANSWER: Janus

Result: 1898 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 08.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 13794

Question: This figure sent Ninigi to earth with three gifts. Uzume finally lured her out after a flayed horse head was tossed at this deity's loom, causing her to hide in a cave. Her temple is torn down and rebuilt every 20 years, and a mirror inside is said to represent her. This deity's brothers were born from their father's nose and right eye, Tsukuyomi and Susano'o. Born to Izanagi, the Imperial family claims descent from her. For 10 points, name this Shinto goddess of the sun.

ANSWER: Amaterasu Omikami

Result: 1899 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 10.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 13829

Question: This figure's father-in-law kidnapped his mother-in-law Marpessa, and with Lyceus killed Castor. Husband of Idas' daughter Cleopatra, this man killed Hylaeus and Rhaecus, two centaurs who tried to rape his companion. His father Oeneus neglected a sacrifice to Artemis, necessitating one of his later feats. This figure murdered his uncles Toxeus and Plexippus when they opposed his giving a hunting prize to a woman. He died after his mother Althea threw a brand into the fire. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who loved Atalanta and slew the Calydonian Boar.

ANSWER: Meleager or Melagros

Result: 1900 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 11.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 13842

Question: A goblet of wine filling six tubs was sent to a deity of this domain, Repun Kamui. In Norse myth, the figure governing this domain was married to Ran, and his daughters were the billow maidens. Orochi was slain by the Shinto god of this domain. One god of this entity was a patron of horse-racing. That god's Greek counterpart was accompanied by Galatea, Thetis, and other Nereids, and hindered Odysseus' journey home. For 10 points, name this aquatic domain of Neptune and Poseidon.

ANSWER: sea or ocean deities [accept equivalents, prompt on water]

Result: 1901 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 13.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 13889

Question: This figure spent time in Gargara, near Mount Ida in Phrygia. His brother turned into a cricket after gaining immortality but not eternal youth. This figure was made into a constellation associated with Aquila. When his father Tros grieved for him, Hermes delivered some creatures who could run on water, a pair of immortal horses. Abducted by Zeus in the form of an eagle, he was the brother of Tithonus, and succeeded Hebe in her position on Mt. Olympus. For 10 points, name this Trojan youth who served as the cupbearer to the gods.

ANSWER: Ganymede

Result: 1902 | Prison Bowl | 2010 | Round: Round 14.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 13909

Question: This figure's cult was centered at Thespiae. He is called Protagonus for being the first-born child of Chaos and Gaia. His union with a mortal bore Hedone. This god's mortal lover was helped by a bunch of ants in performing his mother's punishment. This god had lamp oil spilled on his face after his lover saw his face. He provided her with invisible servants after finding himself unable to perform his mother's bidding. The son of Aphrodite and lover of Psyche, for 10 points, name this god of love, the Greek counterpart of Cupid.

ANSWER: Eros [accept Cupid until "Greek"]

Result: 1903 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 1 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 53496

Question: In the Eleusinian Mysteries, this god is referred to as Protogonus, the first born, and in early Greek myth, he governs the interactions of Uranus and Gaia. The brother of Anteros, his mortal wife spills hot wax on him while attempting to discover his true identity; that wife is the beautiful (*) Psyche. Often described as the son of Ares and Aphrodite and known for carrying a bow that shoots golden arrows that inspire love, name this Greek god of sexuality and love, the counterpart of the Roman Cupid.

ANSWER: Eros [accept Cupid before "Greek"]

Result: 1904 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 10 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 53724

Question: Hermes rescued this god after two giants chained him inside of an urn for thirteen months. Cadmus slayed the dragon guarding this god's spring, but this deity eventually let him marry his daughter Harmonia anyway. The golden fleece is in a grove dedicated to this brother of Eris, who took on the form of a boar to slay (*) Adonis. Athena worked with Diomedes to wound this deity during the Trojan war, and Hephaestus eventually captured Aphrodite in a net with him. Name this Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares [accept Mars before "Greek"]

Result: 1905 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 10 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 53730

Question: Sometimes called the archer Tripurantaka, this god with matted hair is usually depicted dancing with a drum upon a tiger skin. After the gods ill-advisedly churn the sea, he swallows the ensuing upswell of poison, turning his throat (*) blue. This rider of the white bull Nandi is the consort of Parvati and father of Ganesh. He wears a necklace of skulls, reflective of his role as the destroyer. Name this Hindu god who, with Brahma and Vishnu, makes the trimurti.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 1906 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 2 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 53511

Question: Vritra and Tiamat are two of these creatures, who are slain by Indra and Marduk, respectively. Another one, Nithogg, gnaws on a root of Yggdrasil, and Orochi is an eight-headed one who is killed by Susanoo (soo-sah-no). One of these animals represents the east, and is known as Qinglong (ching-long) in China and Seiryuu [say-ryoo] in Japan. In Greek myth, warriors (*) grow when the teeth of these creatures are planted. Name these mythological creatures, enormous reptiles that typically breathe fire in Western tradition.

ANSWER: dragons

Result: 1907 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 3 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 53585

Question: This deity raised Erichthnonius after Hephaestus tried to rape her. This deity made snakes grow from Medusa's head after she desecrated this goddess's temple. She won her favorite city from Poseidon by causing an olive tree to grow there. She is represented by the owl, and she carries the (*) Aegis shield. Born after Zeus swallowed her mother Metis, identify this Greek goddess who sprang full-grown in armor from the head of Zeus, the patron goddess of invention and intellectual reason.

ANSWER: Pallas Athena [or Athene; accept Minerva before "Greek"]

Result: 1908 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 4 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 53612

Question: This god was worshipped as Serapis in Alexandria, but his major cult center was Abydos. The eldest son of Geb and Nut, this god was locked in a chest, after which his body was found supporting a palace in Byblos; after finding him, his killer tore him into 14 pieces, 13 of which were found and reassembled by his wife. That killer was his brother (*) Set, who was later defeated by this man's son, Horus. Symbolized as a green mummy holding a crook and flail, name this husband of Isis and Egyptian god of the afterlife.

ANSWER: Osiris or Usiris or Aser [accept Ptah-Seker-Osiris in any order]

Result: 1909 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 4 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 53618

Question: An invocation to sing of this character's "rage" opens one work. After Patroclus was killed while wearing his armor, he rejoined a fight that he had left after his consort, Briseus, was taken from him. The father of Neoptolemus, this leader of the Myrmidons gained revenge on (*) Hector and paraded him around the gates of Troy for nine days. As a child, his mother, Thetis, dipped him into the river Styx to make him invulnerable, but she failed to cover a certain body part. Name this Ancient Greek hero who was slain when Paris launched an arrow into his heel.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 1910 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 5 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 53635

Question: This Greek deity was also known as Bopis, and bathes yearly in the well Canathus. Ixion was made to spin on a fiery wheel for eternity as punishment for wooing this deity. Peacocks, representing vanity, are symbols of this deity, and she immaculately conceived the deformed god of smithing. She punished Io and Leto for having (*) affairs with her husband, and she drove Heracles mad, causing him to kill his children. The Greek counterpart of Juno, name this goddess of childbirth and marriage, the sister and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera [accept Juno until "Greek"]

Result: 1911 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 6 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 53657

Question: This god tricked Alviss into getting petrified. One possession of this god was forged by dwarves Eitri and Brokkr, and has a short handle due to Loki's interference. This god's other possessions include a "power belt" that doubles his strength which, together with iron gloves called Járngreipr (YARN-gri-pir), will help him slay (*) Jormungandr (YORE-mun-gahn-dur) at Ragnarok. Owner of a hammer that returns when thrown, Mjöllnir (ME-yawl-neer), name this Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor or Donar

Result: 1912 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 7 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 53680

Question: This god carried the Thyrsus, and a play by Euripides sees this figure cause Agave to kill her son for failing to worship this deity. In one myth, he was ripped to pieces by Titans, and in another he caused the deaths of Lycurgus and his son. This god, worshiped by the Maenads, was married to Ariadne. This god's mother, (*) Semele, was a mortal woman killed when she saw this god's father. Born from Zeus's thigh after his mother's death, identify this "twice-born" god of Greek mythology, who presided over wine and nature.

ANSWER: Dionysus [accept Bacchus before "Greek"]

Result: 1913 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 8 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 53689

Question: Born from a blue lotus flower, this god received help with his 360 day calendar from Thoth. This god transformed Hathor into a savage lioness, Sekhmet, who murdered a bunch of people until bribed with beer. In one myth, a goddess mixed this god's spit with clay to make a poisonous snake, which then bit this god and forced him to reveal his secret (*) name. This father of Shu and Tefnut fought the snake Apep and rides a boat across the sky. Name this chief Egyptian god who carries the sun disk on his head.

ANSWER: Ra [accept any combination of the following: Amun, Ra, Re, Atun, Aten]

Result: 1914 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: 9 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 53705

Question: This mythical location is the counterpart to Freyja's Folkvang. This is the home of the rooster Gullinkambi, and eight hundred Einherjar ["EYE"N-hur-yar] will march out of each of this place's five hundred forty doors during Ragnarok. Those warriors consume the meat of Saehrimnir [SAY-hrim-neer] every night. The rafters of this (*) building are made of spears, and the roof is shingled with shields and breastplates. Valkyries bring half of the warriors killed in battle to this mythical hall. Name this "Hall of the Slain," located in Asgard and presided over by Odin.

ANSWER: Valhalla

Result: 1915 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: All Star Game | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 53794

Question: Ceyx [seeks] drowned while seeking the help of one of these entities at Clerus, and Acrisius requested guidance from another of these before his daughter, Danae, was impregnated by Zeus. One of these entities at Ammon ordered that Andromeda be fed to a sea serpent. King Laius (*) consulted one before leaving his son to die on a mountain, and in the Apologia, one of these told Socrates that no man was wiser than he. That one was dedicated to Apollo, and was located at Delphi. Name these Greek temples, where Sibyls foretold the future.

ANSWER: Oracles

Result: 1916 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: Finals Round 1 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 53754

Question: Some myths from this people include Inti as the sun god and Viracocha as the father of Manco Capac. Tupac Amaru was their last emperor, and to communicate, people in this civilization used knotted ropes called quipu (KEY-poo), or the native language quechua (KAY-choo-ah). A civil war between Huascar (HWA-scar) and (*) Atahualpa weakened this empire before a Spanish conquistador ended it. Name this Andean civilization conquered by Francisco Pizarro, the home of Machu Picchu and Cuzco in Peru.

ANSWER: Incas [or Incans]

Result: 1917 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: Finals Round 1 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 53760

Question: This figure killed a bandit who would kill people by tying them to two bent pine trees, Sinis. Heracles failed to rescue this man's friend Pirithous from the Chair of Oblivion. He married Pasiphae's [pass-ih-FEE's] daughter Phaedra after abandoning her sister on the island of Naxos. That sister, (*) Ariadne, had given this hero a ball of thread so he could return home proudly to his father, but Aegeus saw his black sails and committed suicide out of grief. Name this pathfinder out of the labyrinth who killed the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 1918 | SCOP Novice | 2010 | Round: Finals Round 2 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 53767

Question: Upon this legendary figure's death, his crown is passed to Constantine, and he is a member of the Nine Worthies. He discovered the Questing Beast and met King Pellinore, who was pursuing it. He received a mortal wound in battle at Camlann, where he killed his nephew, Mordred, before being taken to the isle of (*) Avalon by Morgan le Fay. That battle arose over a conflict involving this man's wife and the knight Lancelot. Name this legendary British king who inhabited Camelot and wielded Excalibur, the husband of Guinevere and friend of Merlin.

ANSWER: King Arthur Pendragon

Result: 1919 | Sun n Fun | 2010 | Round: Round by Chris Borglum.docx | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 13935

Question: This race's contribution to the Greek attack on Troy was 40 ships commanded by Leontes and Polypoetes. Heracles, while allied with the Dorians, killed one general of this race, Coronus, in battle. Coronus's father was a famous member of this race who angered Zeus by insisting that mortals worship his spear. That mortal had been granted the wish of being changed into an invulnerable male after being raped by Poseidon. Being invulnerable, Caeneus had to be pounded into the ground during battle with their best-known enemies. Descendents of Ixion, for 10 points what is this race of Thessaly who, at the wedding of their king Pirithous, famously clashed with their cousins, the Centaurs?

ANSWER: Lapiths

Result: 1920 | Sun n Fun | 2010 | Round: Round by Editors 1.docx | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 13951

Question: A fragment attributed to Callimachus found in the Hephaestion suggests that the priests of this deity are "thyrsus-fond" runners for whom instruments and bronze castanets clash. Those priests of this deity are said to have ritually castrated themselves, taken on feminine identities and were known as Galloi. A Hittite image of this goddess is carved into the face of Mount Sipylus, and this deity is often identified with the Hurrian Hebat and the Anatolian Kubaba. A vernal equinox festival, the Hilaria was celebrated in her honor, and a rite associated with deity involved the bathing in the blood of a recently sacrificed bull known as the taurobolium. For 10 points, name this goddess worshipped at Pessinus, the consort of Attis and a Phrygian deity worshipped by the Romans as Magna Mater.

ANSWER: Cybele [prompt on "Great Mother" or "Magna Mater"]

Result: 1921 | Sun n Fun | 2010 | Round: Round by Gecko Commando and Dallin Kelson.docx | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 14010

Question: Her breasts are depicted as soft and flaccid from nursing, and this goddess wears a necklace made of human hearts, hands, and skulls, and a skirt of snakes.

ANSWER: Coatlicue

Result: 1922 | Sun n Fun | 2010 | Round: Round by Jason Loy Caleb Robbins and Billy Beyer.docx | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 14035

Question: This god was once forced to consume a porridge that was enough for fifty men. One of this god's sons, who always had four birds hovering above his head, identified his future wife among 150 swans. This god was able to conceive that son by sending Elcmar on a nine-month journey, which enabled him to seduce Boann. Possessions of this god included a magical harp, an inexhaustible cauldron, and a club that could be used to both kill enemies and restore the dead to life. This lover of Morrigan and father of Aonghus was leader of the group that defeated the Fomorii at the Second Battle of Magh Tuireadh. For 10 points, name this figure from Celtic myth who led the Tuatha De Danann, and was known as "the good god."

ANSWER: The Dagda [or Dagodeiwos; or Dag Dia; or Eochaid Ollathair]

Result: 1923 | Sun n Fun | 2010 | Round: Round by Maryland Blind.docx | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 14073

Question: This figure judged his son worthiness to marry Suseri-hime by having him sleep in a room full of snakes. This figure was convinced to engage a monster, when a couple near the River Hi offered their daughter, and this figure instructed that couple to brew eightfold-sake and construct attendant cupboards. A calmer version of this figure is said to have counted and named the plants and animals with his son, O-kuni-nushi. He once lost a bet with a relative when be bit her fertility beads to produce children, but more famously he threw a flayed horse through her sitting room scaring her so much that she hid in a cave. Born when his father Izanagi washed his August nose, for 10 points, name this brother of Amaterasu and Tsukiyomi, the Japanese god of storms and the ocean.

ANSWER: Susanoo No Mikoto [prompt on something that sounds like Brave-Swift-Impetuous-Male]

Result: 1924 | Sun n Fun | 2010 | Round: Round by Shantanu Jha and Chris Ray.docx | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 14140

Question: Pseudo-Apollodorus relates a story in which this man was killed for assaulting the Hyperborean virgin Upis. Two of his daughters were taught to weave by Athena and sacrificed themselves to end a plague, for which they were turned into comets. Besides fathering Menippe and Metioche, another story suggests he pined for his first wife Side. This son of Hyrieus was guided by the sound of hammers and the boy on his shoulders, Cedalion, to reach Helios, who healed the wounds inflicted on this man for his assault of Merope. Though Oenopion blinded him, many tales state it was a huge scorpion that killed him because he boasted of being able to kill all beasts. For 10 points, name this giant mythological huntsman.

ANSWER: Orion

Result: 1925 | Sun n Fun | 2010 | Round: Round by Will Butler Evan Adams and Matt Bollinger.docx | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 14156

Question: This god absorbed attributes from the earlier god Coniraya and from Tutujanawin. Chasca is his attendant and he is served by Cuichu, a rainbow god who is associated with a site important in his worship. He imparted power to people through lines known as ceques and acllas were maidens that were sacrificed to him. The raymi, or festival, dedicated to this god sees him symbolically tied to a post and is held in June. He is the father of the Ayar brothers, and in one story he sends his children to Earth to help people and tells them to plant a golden rod in the ground to start a city. He was the primary god worshiped in the Coricancha, where mummies surround a depiction of him consisting of a golden disk. For 10 points, name this husband of Pachamama and son of Viracocha, the Incan sun god.

ANSWER: Inti

Result: 1926 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: Brandeis + UMD - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 14190

Question: Bali received this figure in the form of a Brahmin, inspiring the Raksha Bandhan festival and the tying of rakhi to symbolize love between siblings. The puja named for Kubera and this figure is often performed before weddings, and she is usually depicted wearing red clothes with gold accents. She is accompanied by two elephants spraying water from their trunks, and she rides Ulooka, an owl. The churning of the sea brought up Siva and this lotus-holding goddess, who is particularly celebrated during the full moon and a holiday whose name means "row of lamps." For 10 points, name this goddess of wealth and prosperity worshipped during Diwali, the consort of Vishnu.

ANSWER: Lakshmi [or Mahalakshmi]

Result: 1927 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: Carleton + UIUC B + Brown - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 14212

Question: In one story of this man's birth, Zeus and Hermes instructed his father to sacrifice a bull, urinate on its hide, and bury it in his wife's grave. While visiting the smithy of Hephaestus, he was given a companion named Cedalion. In one adventure, he followed the sound of a Cyclops's hammer to Lemnos where he faced the sunrise to heal himself. This son of Poseidon and Euryale ravished Merope while drunk and then had his eyes put out by Oenopion, and after Helios restored his sight he fell in love with Eos. For 10 points, name this man who was killed either by Artemis's arrow while swimming or by a scorpion sent by Apollo, a legendary hunter.

ANSWER: Orion

Result: 1928 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: Dunbar + UMN - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 14232

Question: A god thought to be cognate to this deity is the grandfather of the first king, Kon the Young. The Skaldic poem Husdrapa relates a story in which this god turns into a seal to avenge the theft of Freya's necklace Brisengamen. During the funeral of Baldur, this god rode the horse Gulltop. The Voluspa claims that all of the "holy races / greater and lesser" are kinsmen of this resident of Himinbjorg, who was said to be the son of nine mothers. This deity, who is identified with Rig, will kill and be killed by Loki at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this whitest of the Aesir, the blower of the Gjallarhorn whose ability to hear grass growing aids him in guarding Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdallr [accept Rig before "Husdrapa"]

Result: 1929 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: Editors 1 - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 14239

Question: The omniscience of one of these figures couldn't save him from being flung into space from a millet stalk, while another of these figures owns a pair of jewels that control the tides. One group of these figures travels around on the Treasure Ship and includes an individual who grew a skeleton after being born a leech child. Another of them owns a ring of drums with which he creates thunder. They also include a dancer who married the guardian of the bridge between heaven and earth and created such merriment that the one representing the sun emerged from her cave. For 10 points, identify these deities that include Ryujin, Raijin, Uzume, and Amaterasu.

ANSWER: kami [accept Shinto deities or Japanese deities or equivalents; prompt on "dwarves" until "jewels" is read]

Result: 1930 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: Editors 2 - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 14272

Question: Two of this god's servants are thought to be associated with bread-making and are named Byggvir and Beyla. One text claims that he was succeeded by his mortal son Fjolnir as the ruler of Uppsala, while he meets his future wife, a daughter of Aurboda and Gymir, at the grove of Barri. This deity is said to have received Alfheim as a tooth-gift. He kills the giant Beli with the "horn of a hart" but is unarmed at Ragnarok, where he is killed by Surt; both of those events occur after he gives his magic sword to his servant Skirnir in order to woo Gerd. He rides the golden boar Gullinbursti and owns the folding ship Skidbladnir. For 10 points, identify this son of Njord, the Vanir fertility god.

ANSWER: Freyr [accept Yngvi or Ingunar-Freyr]

Result: 1931 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: Editors 3 - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 14295

Question: The land ruled by this deity contained a cave inhabited by dangerous women who sought out unfaithful lovers and a boiling spring home to a worm called the cuiluhuexi [kwi-lu-HYU-shi]. One ritual dedicated to this god involved the killing and eating of amaranth-paste idols, and his titles include "Ninth Lord of the Night". This god served as the third of the five suns, while his sister was the salt goddess Huixtocihuatl [hwi-shto-ki-HWA-tl]. After Tezcatlipoca abducted his first wife, Xochiquetzal [sho-chi-KET-zal], he fathered Tecciztecatl [tek-kiz-te-CAHT-l] with Chalchiuhtlicue [chal-chi-OO-tli-kyu]. For 10 points, identify this deity who governed the souls of the drowned and who demanded child sacrifices, the Aztec god of rain.

ANSWER: Tlaloc [accept Tlalocan before "ritual" is read]

Result: 1932 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: Editors 5 - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 14308

Question: The city of Hampi contains a temple with 1008 structures dedicated to this deity, while other temples dedicated to him include one at Trimbakeshwar, which commemorates the formation of the Godavari River, and the Mallikarjuna Temple at Srishailam. A festival is celebrated to mark the devotion of the consort who stayed up all night to care for this deity after he swallowed poison that came from the churning of the ocean. This deity is depicted performing the Tandava dance in his Nataraja form, and temples dedicated to him feature phallic structures called lingams. For 10 points, name this husband of Parvati who accidentally beheaded his son Ganesh, the Hindu destroyer deity.

ANSWER: Shiva [or Shankara; do not accept "Rudra"]

Result: 1933 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: Finals 1 - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 14351

Question: This man, whose first wife was Cleola, later fathered Anaxibia, who became the queen of Phocis after marrying Strophius. He angered Artemis by hiding the finest golden lamb in his flock in a box, but Hermes later helped him recover a throne after Zeus caused the sun to set in the east. He married Crateus's daughter Aerope after the death of her previous husband, this man's son Pleisthenes. Chrysippus was killed by this man and his brother at the behest of their mother Hippodamia. He killed and cooked his brother Thyestes's children, furthering a curse that had begun with his grandfather Tantalus. For 10 points, identify this son of Pelops, the father of Menelaus and Agamemnon.

ANSWER: Atreus

Result: 1934 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: Finals 2 - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 14372

Question: A son of this figure had three hearts in which three serpents grew; that son, Mechi, was killed by Mac Cecht. This figure once lured a cow belonging to Odras into the cave of Cruachan. This deity owned a chariot pulled by a one-legged horse and was sometimes said to be the daughter of Ernmas. This figure promised to take the blood and kidneys of the Fomorian king Indech after having sex with the Dagda before the Second Battle of Magh Tuireadh. During the Cattle Raid of Cooley, she repeatedly goes unrecognized by Cuchulainn. For 10 points, identify this deity represented as the trio of Badb, Nemain, and Macha, an Irish goddess of war associated with the hooded crow.

ANSWER: the Morrigan [accept Morrigu, Morrighan, Mor-Rioghain, or Morrigna]

Result: 1935 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: Sofa Kings - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 14394

Question: This deity helped resolve a dispute that brought a water goddess back from Nubia and oversaw three major battles between order and chaos. One creature that served this god was a guardian of a lake of fire named Astennu. He gave Isis the words that would resurrect Osiris and once alleviated Nun's sterility by gambling with Khonsu to secure the intercalary days. One of his forms is the god of equilibrium, the baboon-headed A'an. He oversaw the ceremony in which the feather of Ma'at, his feminine counterpart, was weighed by Anubis against the heart of the deceased. For 10 points, name inventor of writing, an Egyptian god of wisdom and magic who is depicted with the head of an ibis.

ANSWER: Thoth [or Djehuty; or Tahuti; or Zehuti; or Techu; or Tetu]

Result: 1936 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: UMN 1 - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 14426

Question: This man reportedly died from drinking from a poisonous spring at Verulamium. Despite his infirmity, reflected in his being referred to as "Half-Dead", this man triumphed in battle against Octa, the son of one of the perpetrators of the Night of the Long Knives, Hengist. His brothers include Constans and Aurelius Ambrosius, and this man's rise to power was foreshadowed by a comet shaped like a particular animal. He tricked his way into to Tintagel Castle while posing as the Duke of Cornwall, Gorlois, in order to make love to Igraine and conceive a famous son. For 10 points, name this man whose success was predicted by Merlin, the father of the future King Arthur.

ANSWER: Uther Pendragon [accept Wthyr or Uter for the forename and Bendragon or Pendraeg for the surname]

Result: 1937 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: USC + Editors 4 - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 14440

Question: Pausanias gives the murder of this man's cousin Oeonus as one cause for his hatred of the family of Hippocoon, all of whom he slaughtered while restoring Tyndareus to the Spartan throne. His weapons were once stolen by the Cercopes, who he then tied to a pole; that happened after his accidental murder of Iphitus led to his serving in penitence at the court of Omphale. Other tales describe how he out-wrestled a son of Gaia named Antaeus and killed an eagle before freeing Prometheus, and his wives include Megara and Deianeira. For 10 points, identify this hero, a son of Alcmene who captured Geryon's cattle and Cerberus while completing a dozen labors for Eurystheus.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules; also accept Alcides or Alcaeus]

Result: 1938 | T-Party | 2010 | Round: USF + Editors 6 - T Party 2010.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 14458

Question: This figure, depicted in the Ramsund Carving, acquired his horse at the river Busiltjorn. Heimar hid this man's daughter in a harp; that daughter, Aslaug, later married Ragnar Lodbrok. He kills and is killed by a son of Gjuki named Guttorm. Tasting the blood of one of his enemies allowed him to understand the language of birds, one of whom informed him that his foster father Regin would betray him. This owner of Grani took the form of Gunnar to leap through a ring of fire and win Brynhild, though he himself married Gudrun. His father gave him the sword Gram, which he used to kill Fafnir. For 10 points, identify this hero of the Volsung Saga, the son of Sigmund.

ANSWER: Sigurd [accept Sigfried or Sivard Snarensvend; prompt on "the noble hart"]

Result: 1939 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Finals 1.docx | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 14507

Question: One of these figures ate powdered mica and promised to remain a virgin after a god appeared to her in a dream. Another of them once poured several cups of wine out of a container to demonstrate his power. One of these figures, given the epithet "old", had a donkey that he could fold into his pocket. During another one's birth, beams of light filled the delivery room, and he didn't stop crying for seven days afterwards. Another of these figures occupied the body of a hobo after his student forgot to bury his original body; that figure is the patron of the poor and is depicted with an iron crutch. These figures lived on a set of five islands surrounded by still water, which they crossed by using clouds, and their leader once slept and saw eighteen years worth of dreams in the time it took his millet to cook. Lead by Lu Dongbin, they are revered alongside the three pure ones. For 10 points, name these Daoist deities, an octet of figures who cannot die.

ANSWER: Eight Immortals or Ba Xian or Pa-Hsien

Result: 1940 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Finals 2.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 14524

Question: Meges, the king of Doulichion, and Polyxeinos were grandsons of this man who fought in the Trojan War. This figure's mother was believed to either be Nausidame or Iphiboe and his father was either Helios or Poseidon. This father of Agamede employed Amarynceus and the Molionidai, Cteatus and Eurytus, to fight in a famous battle. He was succeeded by his son, Phyleus, whom he had earlier exiled. That battle had broken out after this man had failed to fulfill a promise to a figure, who would go on to found the Olympic Games in this figure's hometown. That man had earlier diverted the Peneus and Alpheus Rivers in order to solve this man's most famous problem. The aforementioned problem resulted from the inordinate amount of shit that had been compiled by droves of cattle over the past 30 years. For ten points, name this king Elis, whose stables were cleaned in Heracles' 5th Labor.

ANSWER: Augeas

Result: 1941 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 1.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 14549

Question: Tiebreaker: Thasius of Delos suffered a similar fate as this figure. This figure's father was made immortal by the Horae, who dripped ambrosia and nectar on his lips, and was conceived after Apollo abducted Cyrene. Chiron created an image of this figure after his death, after which his honey-discovering father disappeared. In some versions, Zeus ordered the death of this figure after he fell in love with Semele. This figure had water thrown in his face as he was walking through Gargaphia. Fear was placed into the heart of this son of (*) Autonoe and Aristaeus by a deity who transformed him into a stag, because he stumbled upon her bathing. For 10 points, name this figure who was killed by his own hunting dogs after being transformed by Artemis.

ANSWER: Actaeon

Result: 1942 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 11.docx | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 14567

Question: A pair of wolves were thrown to the ground by a group of four warriors during this event. One figure arrived at this event riding a chariot pulled by animals bound with reins made of vipers. This event occurred immediately after the son of Rind was born, grew in a day, and killed a particular god. The dwarf Litr was killed after being kicked during this event, which also saw the ship Ringhorn being pushed out to sea by Hyrrokin. A horse and the ring Draupnir were placed on the central edifice of this event, and Nanna committed suicide by jumping on the pyre. For 10 points, name this event from Norse mythology, a ceremony honoring the death of Odin and Frigg's son.

ANSWER: Baldr's funeral or Mourning for Baldr (equivalents, they're ok)

Result: 1943 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 12.docx | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 14575

Question: As young man, this man promised the mother of Glonda that he would avenge the death of her son. In doing so, he killed Liath Luachra and obtained the crane bag. In another story about this man, he and eight other men defeated the dog-headed and cat-headed armies of the King of Ruadledth. By sticking a spear into his head to stay awake, this grandfather of Oscar was able to defeat the evil fairy Aileen of Tara. Fear Donrich turned one of this man's consorts, Sadhbh, into a deer and this man's two hounds were called Bran and Sceolan. With the help of Aengus, Diarmuid eloped with a woman, who was supposed to marry this figure, Grainne. This man gained the gift of prophecy when the he sucked the thumb that he had burned while cooking the Salmon of Knowledge for Finnegas. For ten points, name this legendary Irish warrior, the son of Cumhall and father of Oisin, the leader of the Fianna.

ANSWER: Finn MacCool or Deinme or Fionn mac Cumhaill

Result: 1944 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 2.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 14600

Question: The slave Pholoe, who was skilled in this task, was given as a gift to Sergestus. The Minyades were turned into bats for performing this task instead of honoring Dionysus. Another figure known for this ability was the offspring of Idmon of Colophon and worked in Hypaepa. After being raped by Tereus, Philomela used this action to communicate with Procne. Eurymachus and Antinous were prevented from courting (*) Penelope while she was performing this action. Another figure that performed this action was sprinkled with aconite after she depicted the gods' infidelities during a contest of skill with this activity; she was then turned into a spider by Athena. For 10 points, name this art performed by Arachne.

ANSWER: Weaving

Result: 1945 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 3.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 14619

Question: One of these creatures that attacked Thespiae was killed by Menestratus. One of these creatures killed the son of Hipsipyle while she was helping the Seven Against Thebes find water, and was killed by Adrastus. Triptolemus' chariot was pulled by these creatures. Another one of these creatures, located next to an object nailed to an oak, was lulled to sleep by Medea. Another one of these creatures guarded the Golden Apples of the Hesperides and was named Ladon. The remains of another one of these, which lived near the Castilian spring, was used by its killer to create the Sparti; that example of these creatures was killed by Cadmus, who

ANSWER: Dragons [or sea serpents]

Result: 1946 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 4.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 14646

Question: In one story, a warrior cuts this deity in half using a sword named "One Thousand Birds". During the creation of the world, this figure's brother was responsible for clearing the morning mist from the earth and allowing the sun to shine. This figure's companion leaves characteristic scratch marks on trees and buildings. This figure fought a battle alongside a figure wearing a leopard skin, in which they were attacked by a group of 33 gods. Usually depicted wearing a tiger skin, this figure's companion likes to hide in the navels of children, which this figure would then eat. The brother of the wind god Fujin, he performs his most notable action by beating a drum. For 10 points, name this Japanese god of THUNDER.

ANSWER: Raiden [or Raijin]

Result: 1947 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 5.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 14671

Question: Two of these figures were born to Polyphonte after she fell in love with a bear. Two of these figures were clubbed to death by the Fates. Another one of these figures tore Hera's robe before being killed by Zeus' thunderbolt; those figures are Orius, Thoas, Agrius, and Porphyrion. Another one of these figures was invulnerable until he was dragged out of Pallene, named Alcyoneus. In one story their mother attempted to give them an herb that would protect them, but Helios, Eos, and Selene refused to (*) shine. They were fated to be killed only with the help of a mortal. Buried under the island of Mykonos, these children of Uranus and Gaia were killed with the help of Heracles. For 10 points, name these monsters who attempted to overthrow Zeus in their namesake conflict, a group of really big creatures from Greek mythology.

ANSWER: Gigantes [or Giants]

Result: 1948 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 6.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 14684

Question: This figure's seduction of Leucothoe led the jealous Clytia to starve herself and turn into a flower. This figure turned Arge into a doe for boasting that she could run as fast as him. This figure's children were jealous of Tenages, leading them to kill him; those children were responsible for developing astrology and dividing the day into hours and were mothered by Rhode. A group of his children were turned into poplar trees and wept tears of (*) amber after one of their siblings drowned in the river Eriadnus. That figure was born of this deity's affair with Clymene, and was struck by a lightning bolt after he lost control of this figure's chariot. For 10 points, name this father of Phaethon, the Greek god of the sun.

ANSWER: Helios

Result: 1949 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 7.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 14699

Question: One form of this deity fires darts at different groups of people on different days of the week. This deity once disguised himself as a black ant to steal grain from a group of red ants. In some stories, he killed himself upon being tricked into seeing another deity's reflection, and while burning on his funeral pyre his heart ascended to the heavens and a group of birds flew out of the flames. This figure, who could appear in human form wearing a pendant made of a conch shell, was tricked into sleeping with his (*) sister after getting drunk in one myth. He controls the winds in his Ehecatl form. He used his blood and some ground-up bones from Mictlan to create the race of the fifth sun, and this equivalent of Kukulcan was the enemy of Tezcatlipoca. For 10 points, name this feathered serpent of Aztec myth.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl [or Ehecatl before mention; or Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli before "ant"]

Result: 1950 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 8.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 14721

Question: In this mythology, the daughter of the death deity was blind and had nine sons who represented various diseases. One figure in this mythology turns a bunch of cows into bears, resulting in the death of a woman milking said cows. One character in this mythology builds himself a wife out of gold but finds her to be cold and unfeeling. One figure in this mythology refuses to marry the winner of a singing contest;

ANSWER: Finnish Mythology [accept the Kalevala before mention]

Result: 1951 | THUNDER II | 2010 | Round: THUNDER Round 9.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 14735

Question: One creature possessed by this deity was born after Brahma recited a hymn over the egg that Garuda hatched out of. A son of Ravana managed to bind this figure in a noose and drag him across Lanka. This figure's servants were created after this figure aborted Diti's fetus and cut it into several pieces. This figure flooded the village of Govardhan when they refused to worship him at the behest of Krishna. This man employs Visvakarma to build him a palace, and upon him repeatedly asking for more improvements, Vishnu showed him a group of ants that represent his past lives. Agni replaced the (*) testes of this deity with those of a ram after he was cursed by Ahayla. The apsaras dance for him in his home of Svarga, and this owner of the many-headed white elephant Airavata consumed a large amount of Soma in order to destroy the evil dragon Vritra. Vajra is the chief weapon of this figure. For 10 points, name this Hindu god of lightning.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 1952 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 14768

Question: In Cambodian myth, Hari-hara is a combination of this figure and Hiranya. This figure assumed the name "conquerer of death" when he kicked the demon Yama, and the lingam stone represents his phallus. This god drunk the poison from the world's ocean, Halahala, in order to allow the Devatas to access the immortal nectar, thus giving himself the name Neelakantam. In one story, this deity pacified Kali by climbing under her during her victory dance, and in a more famous story severed the head of an elephant to supplant his son's. For 10 points, name this father of Ganesha and husband of Parvati, the destroyer god of the Hindu Trimurti.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 1953 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 10.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 14787

Question: This deity alone dared pour ale for the giant Hrungnir upon his visit to Asgard, and a god disguised as this deity eats an ox and eight salmon in the Thrymskvitha. To travel to Thjazi's hall Loki once borrowed this deity's falcon cloak Valshamr, and the hrimthurs who built Asgard asked for the sun, moon, and this goddess's hand in return. Half of fallen warriors go to her hall Folkvangr, and her possessions include the boar Hildisvini and an object acquired by her sleeping with several dwarves, the necklace Brisingamen. For 10 points, name this goddess who rides a chariot drawn by cats, the Norse goddess of love and beauty.

ANSWER: Freya [or Freyja; accept similar equivalents]

Result: 1954 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 11.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 14809

Question: Ancient depictions portray this figure as horse-like in appearance; however, more familiar depictions of her emerged during the fifth century, during which she was given the epithet "fair-cheeked". Ovid depicts her as a vain maiden who was raped by Poseidon in the temple of Athena, thereby desecrating it. As the only mortal member of her kind, her head was placed on Athena's shield, the aegis, after she was decapitated by the eventual founder of Mycenae, whereupon Chrysaor and Pegasus emerged from her neck. For 10 points, name this snake-haired deity beheaded by Perseus, the most famous of the gorgons, who turned those who gazed upon her into stone.

ANSWER: Medusa

Result: 1955 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 12.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 14822

Question: In Babylonian myth, one deity of this entity forms a triad with Ishtar and Shamash, Sin. In Aztec myth, Huitzilopochtli decapitates Coyolxauhqui whose head becomes this, while Jade Rabbit is said to live here in Eastern myth. One goddess of it was married to the divine archer Houyi and overdosed on magical elixir, Cheng'E, and another deity of this was born by washing out of his father's right eye, Tsukuyomi. In Norse mythology, the wolf Hati chases this and will eat it at Ragnarok, and an ibis-headed god who created writing, Thoth, is also its deity. For 10 points, identify this celestial body ruled over by Selene and commonly contrasted with the sun.

ANSWER: moon

Result: 1956 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 13.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 14841

Question: Although she shared a name with a daughter of King Nisus, her father was Phorcys. According to Ovid, the sea god Glaucus fell in love with her, and asked a sorceress to make him a love potion. That same sorceress, Circe, fell in love with Glaucus herself and instead created a poison that turned this woman into a many-bodied monster, including those of the four dogs from which her name originates. After her transformation, she sat on the side of the Strait of Messia, where she menaced various passing ships. For 10 points, name this six-headed creature, who worked in tandem with Charybdis, and who killed six of Odysseus's men when he sailed past her.

ANSWER: Scylla

Result: 1957 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 14.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 14867

Question: One man sent to spy on her, Trendhorn, had his eye knocked out by a chess piece, and Leabharcham lied about her appearance to protect her. As a result of a prophecy made by the druid Cathbad, she was raised in seclusion until she was old enough to be married to King Conchobar, despite objections from his knights. However, she fell in love with Naoise and later escaped with him and his two brothers, who were eventually killed outside Emain Macha. She was offered to the killer of her lover, which caused her to bash her own head against a rock out of misery. For 10 points, name this green-eyed woman whose beauty brought grief to all of Ireland, a heroine of the Ulster cycle.

ANSWER: Deirdre of the Sorrows [or Derdriu]

Result: 1958 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 14883

Question: In one legend involving this figure, he meets Fadir and Modir and later claims their son Jarl, and in another story featuring him he transformed into a seal and fought for the necklace Brisingamen. Occasionally referred to as "Rig," this god nicknamed "gold-toothed" wields the sword Hofund and rides the steed Gulltop, and the Lay of Hyndla references Gjalp and Greip as being two of this deity's nine mothers. He was said to be able to hear the grass grow, and he will kill and be killed by Loki at Ragnarok. Known as the "White God," for 10 points, identify this Norse deity, owner of Gjallrhorn and guardian of the Rainbow Bridge.

ANSWER: Heimdallr

Result: 1959 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 14911

Question: In some stories, this deity fathered Zagreus and Mellinoe by Persephone, as well as the sisters Aoida, Melete, and Mneme, the three original muses. In addition to releasing the Hecantonchires and the Cyclopes in the battle against the Titans, which he helped instigate, he incinerated the mother of Dionysus after exposing his full radiance to her. He liked shape-changing, having abducted the nymph Europa in the form of a bull as well as persuading his wife to marry him by turning into a bird. For 10 points, named this god raised on Mount Ida by the goat Amalthea, the husband of Hera and king of the Pantheon.

ANSWER: Zeus

Result: 1960 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 14921

Question: In one myth involving this deity, a relative flung a dead horse at her and killed several handmaidens. In another legend involving this figure, the ancestor of Jimmu, her brother created five men from her necklace, though she made three from his sword. This figure was given a sword her brother found inside the body of the Yamata-no-Orochi, the Kusanagi. In a more well-known myth involving this figure and Tajikara-O's intervention, seeing her reflection in a mirror caused her to leave the cave she had shut herself in. For 10 points, name this sister of Tsukuyomi and Susano'o, the Shinto sun goddess.

ANSWER: Amaterasu

Result: 1961 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 14944

Question: Some stories report that this figure was sent on his greatest quest after the sons of Pallas assassinated Androgeus. This figure earlier beat Periphetes into the ground, and wrestled Eurytus to death at the wedding of his best friend to Hippodamia. This man kicked Sciron into a pit with a man-eating turtle and murdered Sinis by tying him to pine trees. This man managed to obtain his father's sword by lifting a rock, and later abandoned his first wife on Naxos, where she went on to marry Dionysus. For 10 points, name this husband of Hippolyta and Ariadne, an Athenian hero and the slayer of the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 1962 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 14956

Question: In one story, this figure killed Chione because she compared her beauty to this deity's, and another myth states that she tricked the giants Otus and Ephialtes into killing each other. Other sources state that she killed Adonis to avenge the death of Hippolytus, and she was responsible for calming the winds before Agamemnon's departure for the Trojan War for killing a sacred stag. Along with her brother, she killed the children of Niobe, and Orion was supposedly the only man she loved. For 10 points, name this sister of Apollo who turned Actaeon into a stag after he saw her bathing, the Greek goddess of the hunt.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 1963 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 14986

Question: In one myth, one of these created the Earth, sun, and moon from a snail, and another legend states that one of these was responsible for the creation of the constellation Ursa Major. In Japanese folklore, these creatures gain the ability to turn into women, known as the Jorogumo, and they are usually seen devouring male travelers. In Lakota mythology, Iktomi was associated with this animal. The Ashanti trickster god Anansi often takes the form of one of these, and a certain Greek maiden was turned into one of these after angering Athena. For 10 points, name this type of creature often associated with a weaver who boasted that she was better than the gods, Arachne.

ANSWER: spiders

Result: 1964 | TJ NAREN | 2010 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 15010

Question: In one variant on a myth involving him, he traveled to the oracle Aornum in Thesprotia, and a story about his death tells that he was torn to death on Mount Pangaion by Thracian Maenads for spurning Dionysus, while in a separate myth his singing head floated down the Hebrus River. As an Argonaut he was useful in drowning out the Sirens' voices. After his wife was bitten by a nest of snakes and died, he journeyed to the underworld to regain her, softening Hades' and Persephones' hearts with his music, but lost her a second time by looking back. For 10 points, name this great lyre player, singer, and lover of Eurydice.

ANSWER: Orpheus

Result: 1965 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 15041

Question: In one story told by these people, a man tricks a ghost into carrying him before selling him as a goat. In one creation legend of these people, a woman uses five colored stones to repair the sky after defeating a flood monster and creating people from clay. A god of these people drinks an entire river but still dies of thirst during a race with the sun. One of their holidays celebrates the story of an old man's organizational ideas defeating a terrifying monster. One hero of these people ended a period of terrible heat on earth by shooting nine of the ten suns. One creator diety of these people is depicted as a hairy monster who breaks an egg and pushes apart the heavens and earth. For 10 points, name this mythology which includes the creator Pangu and in which the Three Immortals serve over the Jade Emperor.

ANSWER: Chinese mythology

Result: 1966 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 10.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 15070

Question: One creature from the mythology of these people is said to strangle people who sleep close to the ground; accordingly, they always slept on elevated beds. One character from their myths is a chameleon that changes from green to brown to mourn for a sloth. That chameleon had tried to bring immortality to mankind, but was too slow to complete its task. Their mythology also includes a dwarf with only half a body known as a Tikoloshe. Among their deities are one who presides over rain, agriculture, rainbows, and beer, as well as a goddess of rivers who is said to have murdered numerous people during times of flooding. Those figures, Mbaba Mwana Waresa and Mamlambo, join Unkulunkulu in their pantheon, which was created in a giant swamp known as Uthlanga. For 10 points, name this African mythology which Nandi may have told as bedtime stories to her son Shaka.

ANSWER: Zulus Mythology

Result: 1967 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 11.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 15085

Question: After this figure died, his body was taken to a gigantic mill around whose axis the universe revolved. Among his children are an unnamed couple born from his armpits and a six-headed son born from this figure's legs. His son Thrudgelmir would later father Bergelmir, who used a hollowed-out tree to escape the deluge of blood that flowed from this figure after he was killed by the sons of Borr. Four dwarves that represent the cardinal directions hold up this figure's skull, and before his death he fed on four rivers of milk from the cow Audumla, who lived with him in the void Ginnungagap. Later, his bones became mountains and his body was used to create Midgard. For 10 points, name this primordial being who founded the race of giants and whose body was used by Villi, Ve, and Odin to create the Norse universe.

ANSWER: Ymir

Result: 1968 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 12.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 15104

Question: The graceful death of this man's illegitimate son Cebriones sparked Patroclus to joke about oyster diving and his daughter Laodice was married to Telephus before being swallowed by the earth. In one story, this figure was saved when his sister offered Heracles a golden veil. He was originally known as Podarces and was put on the throne by Heracles after his father refused to pay Apollo and Dionysus for their work on the city walls. This brother of Hesione and son of Laomedon used twelve robes, twelve cloaks, twelve sheets, twelve mantles, and twelve tunics to ransom the corpse of one of his sons. This man was dragged out of the temple of Zeus and killed by Neoptolemus after the death of his sons Deiphobus and Helenus and the abduction of his daughter Cassandra. For 10 points, name this husband of Hecuba and father of Paris and Hector, the king of Troy during the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Priam

Result: 1969 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 13.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 15124

Question: The path to this figure's residence includes a stretch of eleven leagues in the land of Night, which leads to a garden wherein each tree bears precious gems. After telling his wife that all men are liars, this figure orders his wife to bake loaves of bread and to lay them at a visitor's feet. Sometimes known as Atrachasis in an alternate version of the work he appears in, this character sacrifices a sheep after falling to his knees and weeping at the sight that all men have been turned to stone. This resident of Dilmun and priest of Shuruppak is visited by a man who crosses the Waters of Death with the help of Urshanabi. This resident of Dilmun and priest of Shuruppak is visited by a man who crosses the Waters of Death with the help of Urshanabi. This figure was once told to construct a giant vessel in preparation of a flood. He instructs that previously mentioned visitor to sleep for six days and seven nights sothat he could attain this figure's immortality. For 10 points, identify this ageless mortal visited by Gilgamesh.

ANSWER: Utnapishtim [accept Atrachasis prior to mention]

Result: 1970 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 15158

Question: This god turned the intrusive Agraulos to stone for easier access to her sister Herse, and he laid a trap so he could catch and rape the swift Cretan princess Apemosyne. He's not Poseidon, but this deity turned Battos to stone and Hierax into a hawk for tattling on two of his exploits. In one story, this deity wins back the sinews of Zeus from Typhon, and he kills the giant Hippolytos with a golden sword. This god is robbed by Arabs in one of Aesop's fables. He was honored by namesake rectangular sculptures topped with his head and usually placed at crossings and boundaries. This god's most sacred ground was the place of his birth, Mt. Kyllene, and along with Zeus he rewarded Philemon and Bauchis for their hospitality. As a child, this god crafted the first lyre after stealing Apollo's cattle. For 10 points, name this owner of the caduceus and some winged sandals, the Greek messenger god.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 1971 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 15201

Question: According to one legend, this figure's mother had a dream in which he was able to help put out a fire after a strange old man in a cap gave him an iron rod. In another myth, this figure is so modest that he tries and fails to speak three times after being afforded a great honor. In a story of his childhood, he rides a massive bucking colt until it dies of a burst blood vessel. In another story, this figure's father plants cabbages in the shape of his name. One legend tells of how a man named Isaac excitedly runs home to tell his wife Sarah that he saw this figure praying alone on the ground. Constantino Brumidi painted a fresco of this figure's apotheosis, and many of the stories associated with this man were originated by Parson Weems. In many myths, he displays his strength by throwing things, such as a rock over the Natural Bridge or a silver dollar over the Potomac River. For 10 points, name this wooden toothed figure who cuts down his father's cherry tree in his most famous legend.

ANSWER: George Washington

Result: 1972 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 15211

Question: This city was the destination of the first ship ever built, and one of that ship's passengers, Hypermnestra, founded a line of its kings with her husband Lynceus. Hypermnestra's sisters who also lived in this city were condemned to fill jugs with holes in them in the underworld. Those sisters were the fifty Danaides, who had been ordered to kill the sons of Aegyptus on their wedding night after fleeing to this city. This city's mythical founder Phoroneus is sometimes considered the discoverer of fire and the first man. A king of this city during the Trojan war managed to wound Aphrodite and Ares on the same day, and its earlier king Adrastus teamed up with men like Tydeus in an effort to place Polynices on the throne of Thebes. For 10 points, name this city central to the Seven Against Thebes which was led by Diomedes in the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Argos

Result: 1973 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 15247

Question: This deity's two daughters were the snow nymph Chione and Phineas's wife Cleopatra. According to Homer, he fathered twelve colts after falling in love with the mares of Erikthonius. In one of Aesop's fables, this god loses a contest with Helius or Phoebus to see which of them can strip a man of his clothes. The Delphic Oracle referred to this god as the son-in-law of Athens and advised praying to him to ensure the destruction of Persian ships. His namesake sons were individually known as Zetes and Calais and were winged beings that joined the Argonauts and chased the harpies away from Phineas's table. This god abducted a daughter of Erectheus as she played in the river Ilissos and brought her to the Sarpedonian rock. This husband of Orithyia was the brother of Notus and Eurus, but this member of the Anemoi is most often associated with his brother Zephyr. For 10 points, name this Greek god of the north wind.

ANSWER: Boreas

Result: 1974 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 15275

Question: One member of this group was the mother of Sparta-founder Lacedaemon and was turned into a deer by Artemis in an unsuccessful attempt to keep her from getting raped by Zeus. Another member of this group was the mother of Dardanus and was sometimes known as the "lost" one. They lent their name to the group of sacred women who served at the Oracle at Dodona. In addition to Taygete and Electra, this group included a figure who raised Callisto's son Arcas and hid in the cave of Cyllene to give birth to Apollo. The oldest one was Maia, and as a group they were the daughters of the nymph Pleione and Atlas. They were first transformed into doves by Zeus and finally into stars in order to escape from the hunter Orion. For 10 points, name this group known as the "seven sisters."

ANSWER: the Pleiades

Result: 1975 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 15297

Question: In a story from Irish myth, Midir transforms himself and Etain into one of these animals after hustling Eochaid at a game of fidchell. In another Irish legend, Aoife transforms the Children of Lir into these animals, a state they are trapped in for nine hundred years. According to most Greek sources, either doves or these animals draw the chariot of Aphrodite. In Hinduism, one of these animals has the ability to separate the milk from a mixture of milk and water. That example of this animal is the mount of a goddess of music who is the consort to Brahma and is named Saraswati. After killing the Elk of Hiisi, Lemminkainen is killed by the herdsman Markahattu while trying to shoot one of these animals with his crossbow. One deity in the form of this animal fathered Helen and Castor and Pollux. For 10 points, name this animal which inhabits Tuonella in the Kalevala and which Zeus transforms into to seduce Leda in Greek myth.

ANSWER: swans

Result: 1976 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: The Finals 1.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 15319

Question: In one legend, this knight saves a lion by killing a serpent it is fighting. He stabs himself in the thigh for penance after the image of the red cross on his sword barely prevents him from losing his virginity to a temptress. In another story, his sister Dindrane gives him the Sword of the Strange Belt and gives her life to save a leper. This character eventually marries Blanchefleur, and embarrasses himself with his ignorance after being raised in seclusion by his mother. This character is mentored by Sir Gornemont, who warns him against impolitely asking questions. That injunction backfires when this knight fails to heal the wounded Fisher King by not asking about a mysterious procession at Corbenic Castle. In another legend this knight joins Galahad and Bors as the only knights who see the grail. For 10 points, name this knight whose story was told in a Wolfram von Eschenbach epic and a Wagner opera.

ANSWER: Sir Percival [or Parzival]

Result: 1977 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: The Finals 2.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 15353

Question: This figure killed the Thracian giant Alcyoneus by incapacitating him with arrows and dragging him out of his homeland of Pallene. He had his weapons stolen by the mischevious Cercopes but let them go when they made him laugh. This character stole the tripod from the oracle of Delphi after its answer concerning the death of Iphitus displeased him. He discovered the location of the apples of the Hesperides by defeating the shape shifter Nereus, and he stole the belt of the Amazon queen Hippolyte because Admete desired it. This hero served the Lydian queen Omphale for three years after accidentally killing his music teacher Linos and the centaur Chiron. This figure died after contacting a tunic smeared in Nessus's blood given to him by Dianara, and his exploits included capturing the Cattle of Geryon and cleaning the Augean Stables for Eurystheus. For 10 points, name this Greek demigod who completed twelve labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 1978 | VCU Open (Saturday) | 2010 | Round: The Finals 2.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 15355

Question: In one story, this figure wrestles the Bear Lake monster before throwing it all the way to Scotland where it becomes the Loch Ness Monster. He comes across crooked prairie dogs, square eggs, and birds with one leg longer than the other on the perfectly smooth Pinnacle Peak, which he uses to create a perpetual motion machine. His love interest rides a giant catfish and he himself becomes leader of the Hell's Gate gang after throwing his horse over his shoulders, using a rattlesnake as a whip, and riding a cougar a hundred miles. He falls in love with Slue-foot Sue and subdues a cyclone with a lasso. He only realizes he is a man after looking in a stream as an adult, after getting separated from his pioneer parents and being raised by coyotes. For 10 points, name this American folk hero and "greatest cowboy of all time."

ANSWER: Pecos Bill

Result: 1979 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 15368

Question: While disguised as Melas, this deity was struck on the thigh and wounded by Teuthis. She gave Asclepius the blood from both the left and right sides of Medusa. She avenged the underpaid Nicandra by causing Alcinoe to tall in love with another man. The birth of Erichthonius occurred after Hephaestus's failed attempt at raping her. In her youth, she built a (*) wooden statue after accidentally killed a friend. She defeated Poseidon in one contest when his salty fountain couldn't measure up to her olive trees. She is often referred to as "gray-eyed" by Homer, who describes her disguising herself as Mentor and aiding Odysseus. Her mother Metis was swallowed by Zeus, causing her to emerge fully grown from his head. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of wisdom.

ANSWER: Athena

Result: 1980 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 10.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 15387

Question: In one story, Cadmus slays one of these animals sacred to Ares and is subsequently turned into one. In another story, Hera turns Tiresias into a woman after he sees two of these animals mating and kills one of them. Typhon's wife Echidna is usually described as half-nymph and half one of these animals that kill Eurydice. One type of these animals is an enemy of (*) Apollo and is killed by him at the site of the Delphic Oracle. The Ouroboros consists of one of them biting its own tail, and two of them can be found on the Caduceus. Hera sends two of these animals in an attempt to kill a young Heracles. These animals made up the hair of the Gorgon sister Medusa. For 10 points, name these reptiles.

ANSWER: snakes [or serpents; or dragons]

Result: 1981 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 11.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 15402

Question: This figure was told by the Delphic oracle that a bladder could be submerged, but it would not drown. He survived an attempted poisoning when his father recognized his sword, after that father of this man had married Medea and sent him to kill the Marathonian Bull. He was made to sit on the Chair of Oblivion during an attempt to abduct (*) Persephone, which was undertaken after his successful abduction of a young Helen with his Lapith friend Pirithous. He refused to wash Sciron's feet, instead feeding him to a giant turtle, and raped Perigune after killing her tree-bending father Sinis. His father Augeus died when he forgot to replace black sails with white ones after Ariadne helped him kill the Minotaur. For 10 points, name this king of Athens and Greek hero.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 1982 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 12.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 15421

Question: One version of this deity was usually depicted as a child holding his finger to his mouth. Another version of this god was depicted as a sphinx and as a companion to Khepri. A third had the epithet "the two horizons" and wasn't Amun, but was syncretized with Ra. He had four sons named Imsety, Duamutef, Hapi, and Qebehsenuef. This god came to great prominence when the rulers of his cult center of (*) Nekhem united the kingdom and made it the capital of the empire. His most popular symbol was the wedjat, which represents the eye that was wounded in a fight and healed by Thoth. This god's eyes were the son and the moon, and in some stories he killed Seth to avenge his father Osiris. For 10 points, name this falcon god of ancient Egypt.

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 1983 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 13 or Bentley.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 15441

Question: This man ignores the warnings of an old woman by a grave in killing the Giant of St. Michael's Mount. He defeats the forces of eleven rebels when the tents in their camp simultaneously collapse. He defeats the governor Frollo in single combat and has a dream about a dragon fighting a bear during his war against Lucius Tiberius. This man is defeated three times by Pellinore and is only saved when he has a spell cast on him. He is conceived after his father tricks (*) Gorlois into letting him sleep with Lady Igraine, and he is raised by Sir Ector. He dies at the battle of Camlann after his illegitimate son Mordred usurps his kingdom while he is besieging the castle of Lancelot. For 10 points, name this son of Uther Pendragon who is advised by the wizard Merlin and heads the Knights of the Round Table.

ANSWER: King Arthur

Result: 1984 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 15475

Question: This figure's death was confirmed when a raven landed on his shoulder, as he had strapped himself to a stone in order to remain standing. His death was set into motion after a goddess in disguise tricked him into eating dog meat. Although he is not Sir Gawain, this man once entered into a beheading contest with a demon. This man learned the art of fighting with the (*) gae bulg from the warrior woman Scathach along with his foster-brother Ferdiad, whom he fought at a ford for three days. This son of Deichtine and Lugh had fourteen pupils, fingers, and toes. He once killed a smith's guard dog, and after offering to make amends by taking its place, this husband of Emer had his name changed from Setanta. For 10 points, name this hero who fought Maeve during the Cattle Raid of Cooley.

ANSWER: Cuchulainn [accept Setanta before mentioned]

Result: 1985 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 15487

Question: Ba'al is sometimes depicted as one of these animals. One of these creatures worshipped in Memphis was originally called the Herald of Ptah, and was later identified as a god of the dead, Apis. In Hindu myth, one which emerged during the churning of the ocean was named Surabhi. One appearing briefly in the Prose Edda is (*) Audhumla. The steed of Shiva is one of these animals named Nandi, and Gilgamesh and Enkidu killed one "of heaven." As an infant, Hermes stole some of these belonging to Apollo, while others belonging to Geryon were stolen by Heracles. This animal is used to depict the Egyptian goddess of love and fertility, Hathor. Pasiphae mated with this type of creature which, for 10 points, forms the head of the resulting offspring, the Minotaur.

ANSWER: cows [accept cattle, bulls, or other clear knowledge equivalents]

Result: 1986 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 15519

Question: According to one story, this figure is disguised as a girl and raised by Athamas of Orchomenus, who kills his own son Learchus when struck with madness by Hera. That tale also describes how a pomegranate tree springs up from his blood when he is torn apart and boiled by Titans. In another story, this deity takes refuge with Thetis and sets a drought on the land of the Edones before making king Lycurgus slice up his own son thinking he is cutting ivy. His mother dies when Zeus is unable to break a pledge to show himself in his full splendor, but he is (*) transplanted into his father's thigh. This son of Zeus and Semele has a group of followers responsible for killing and tearing apart Orpheus, the maenads. For 10 points, name this Greek god of wine and revelry.

ANSWER: Dionysus [or Bacchus]

Result: 1987 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 15531

Question: Athena reassured this figure by sending her a vision of her sister Iphthime in a dream. She tells a stranger that dreams can come through a horn gate or an ivory gate after asking him to interpret her dream in which an eagle attacks twenty geese. Her bed was built around a giant olive tree, and her husband married her after giving her uncle (*) Tyndareus the idea of extracting an oath from the suitors of Helen or winning her in a footrace held by Icarius. Every night, she unravels a shroud that she weaves for her father in law Laertes. She withstood the advances of Eurymachus, Antinous, and a host of other pillaging suitors with the help of her son Telemachus. For 10 points, name this wife of Odysseus.

ANSWER: Penelope

Result: 1988 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 15543

Question: One deity in this mythological system is sometimes depicted as a dancing skeleton smoking a cigarette. That god, Cizin is also known for wearing a collar with nerves and eyes hanging from it. According to this mythology, a set of four brothers known as the Bacab hold up the sky from each of the four cardinal positions. A prominent place in this belief system is guarded by (*) three rivers of blood, pus, and scorpions, and those who enter it are often tricked into sitting on a hot surface to entertain the rulers One Death and Seven Death along with their companions. The story of that underworld, Xibalaba, is chronicled in the Popol Vuh. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican mythology which features a pair of Hero Twins.

ANSWER: Mayans

Result: 1989 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 15551

Question: One of these creatures ate raw meat while dining with Heracles in a cave after the completion of Heracles's fourth labor and later caused the enmity of his companions by opening a jar of wine; he was killed when he dropped an arrow on his foot during the ensuing fight. Another one of these creatures was the offspring of Cronos and Philyra and he gave up his immortality since he could not heal himself. A third one of these creatures tried to rape (*) Deianeira as he helped her across a river and later sent her a poisoned cloak in anger. Generally speaking, they were the offspring of Ixion and a cloud, and they disrupted the wedding of Pirithous as part of their feud with the Lapiths. Phocis, Nessus, and Chiron were all, for 10 points, which type of creature that was part horse and part man?

ANSWER: centaurs

Result: 1990 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 15567

Question: Krishna once convinced Nanda to call off a puja meant for this god, and had to protect the inhabitants of Vrindavana from this god's wrath by holding up Govardhan Hill. This god once hid in the stalk of a lotus plant, emerging to save his wife Sachi from the usurper Nahusa, and he disrupted the penances of Vishvamitra by sending an Apsara to distract the sage. His servants are the Maruts, and he was the second god invoked by Kunti, leading to the birth of (*) Arjuna. He tricked Ahalya into sleeping with him, but was caught by her husband, Gautama Maharishi, whose curse caused vaginas to cover this god's body. This god's weapon is Vajra, which he used to slay the dragon Vritra. He rides Airavata, a white elephant, and carries a thunderbolt. For 10 points, identify this king of the Vedic demigods, the Hindu god of war, storms, and rain.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 1991 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 15594

Question: This god once helped out Hera after she promised him one of the Graces, Pasithia, as his wife, and he shares with his brother the symbol of an inverted torch. One of his sons is also known by the name Icelus, and in book sixteen of the Iliad he carries the body of Sarpedon back to Lycia with his brother, whose Roman equivalent is Mors. He lives either on the island of Lemnos (*) or in a cave through which the river Lethe flows, and this deity is the son of Erebus and Nyx, both of whom are associated with darkness. Often depicted with wings attached to his head, this god is also the brother of Thanatos and the father of the Oneiroi, a group of beings which include Phobetor, Phantasos, and Morpheus; that group brings him the dreams of mortals. For 10 points, name this Greek god of sleep.

ANSWER: Hypnos

Result: 1992 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 15617

Question: Among this deity's servants are the attendant Fulla, the guard Syn, who watches over the doors of her water-filled palace Fensalir, and the messenger Gna, who once delivered one of her apples to King Rerir. One of the two beings allowed to sit on the throne Hlidskialf, she once stole the gold from another god's statue and slept with a dwarf (*) in order to conceal the secret, prompting her husband to go into exile, during which time she may have had affairs with her brothers-in-law Vili and Ve. This fertility goddess often used a spinning wheel to create clouds. As a seer of all destinies, she was able to extract promises from all living things, except mistletoe, to not harm her son Balder. For 10 points, name this Norse goddess, the wife of Odin.

ANSWER: Frigga

Result: 1993 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: The Finals 1.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 15650

Question: This figure's father, whose name means "unlucky traveler," was powerful enough to move massive stones. This figure inherited that trait, allowing him to form the u-shaped canyon Asbyrgi after falling from the sky. This father of the brothers Falka and Grani proved to be faster than Gullfaxi when he reached the gates of Asgard before the giant (*) Hrungnir. He also crossed the river Gjoll during his trip to Hel with the Aesir Hermod. Said to have runes carved in his teeth, he was conceived when the gods tried to get out of their deal of paying the moon, the sun, and Freya to the Hrimthurs for building the wall around Asgard. That conception occured when the Hrimthurs' workmate Svadilfari was distracted by Loki disguised as a mare. For 10 points, name this mythological creature, the eight-legged horse owned by Odin.

ANSWER: Sleipnir

Result: 1994 | VCU Open (Sunday) | 2010 | Round: The Finals 2.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 15664

Question: Thersander ruled this city after the Battle of Glisas was won by the Epigoni. The area of this city was first settled by the Ectenes and their ruler Ogygus. Another king of this city was named Labdacus, and. like his predecessor. was killed by the Maenads after outlawing the Bacchanals. A king of Phocis named Pelagon gave the founder of this city a (*) cow which he followed to its location, and that founder defeated the spartoi who sprung up when he planted dragons' teeth. One ruler of this city decrees that Polynices and the other Argives could not be buried after a war, and one man saves this city by answering the Sphinx's riddle. That king is the father of Antigone and sleeps with his mother Jocasta. For 10 points, name this city of Creon and Oedipus.

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 1995 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - Brandeis + UCLA A.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 4762

Question: This figure reunites with her father, alternately called Schoeneus or Iasius, in between the two primary myths involving her. After taking an oath, this figure kills the lustful centaurs Rhoikos and Hylaois. Althaia kindles a brand after one man kills his uncles Toxeus and Plexippus for insulting this woman. As punishment for having sex in Cybele's temple, this woman is turned into a lion. This huntress was raised by a she-bear and first wounded the Calydonian Boar in one story, and in another, she is distracted by golden apples and loses a footrace to Hippomenes. For 10 points, name this Argonaut and Greek warrior woman.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 1996 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - Caltech + Dartmouth A.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 15693

Question: This god was the lover of Melaina and Corycia, the daughters of Cephissus, who was turned into a sea monster by this god. This god's lover Cyparissus asked that his tears fall forever in penance for killing a tame deer, a penance this god granted by turning Cyparissus into a cypress tree. This god served as shepherd for King Admetus for one year as punishment for avenging the death of his son Asclepius, but his less forgiving actions include flaying the satyr Marsyas. This lover of Hyacinthus exchanged several of his cattle with Hermes for the first tortoise-shell lyre. Also known for pursuing Daphne, for 10 points, name this Greek god of light, music, and the arts.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 1997 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - Duke A + Harvard Zhao.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 15737

Question: Glaucus of Corinth was torn apart by his own horses as punishment for angering this deity. This figure baked two barley cakes for Charon for a trip to the underworld in an episode where she made he future daughter-in-law fetch wool from deadly golden sheep and sort piles of grains. This figure was unable to stop a boar from castrating and goring one of her lovers, who she shared with Persephone. This nominal wife of Hephaestus and lover of Adonis was born from foam after Uranus's castration and received Eris's Apple of Discord, leading Paris to abduct Helen. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of love.

ANSWER: Aphrodite [do not prompt on or accept Venus]

Result: 1998 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - Dunbar + University of Minnesota A.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 15756

Question: The Atharvashirsha is recited either 108 or 1000 times in the honor of this figure on Sankashti Chaturthis. The "visarjan" or the immersion of his idols in water occurs on the 14th day of the month of Bhadrapada. Idols of this deity often include his vehicle, a mouse, at his feet. Vyasa dictated the Mahabharata to this figure, who is frequently worshiped before undertaking important tasks. He once received a mango of wisdom and the status of "elder" by defeating his brother Kartikeya in a race. This figure received his most famous aspect after interceding between his parents, Parvati and Shiva, the latter of whom decapitated him. For 10 points, identify this remover of obstacles, an elephant-headed Hindu deity.

ANSWER: Ganesh [or Ganapati; or Vinayaka; or Lambodara; or Ekadanta]

Result: 1999 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - Maryland A + CWRU.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 15788

Question: One of these figures is a diviner of bird flights, and another one gets impaled on top of an ash-tree. In addition to Amycus and Asbolus, one of these figures named Eurytion coerces Dexamenus into setting him up with Dexamenus's daughter, and several of them cause a ruckus at the wedding of Pirithous. One member of this group that fought the Lapiths offers a jug of wine to a visiting hero, and another gives Deianira a shirt with which to poison her husband. The most famous one is allowed to die after being struck by a poison arrow during a ruckus caused by Pholus's opening of a jug of wine. Nessus and Chiron are, for 10 points, what half-horse and half-man creatures in Greek myth?

ANSWER: centaurs [or kentauroi]

Result: 2000 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - OSU + Carleton A.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 15821

Question: At birth, this figure was surrounded by a cluster of women, who cried as if he were still-born. This figure fathered Nebrophonus and Euneus after impregnating Hypsipyle, the queen of the foul-smelling ladies of Lesbos. After helping Hera cross the Anauros, this figure lost a sandal, fulfilling a prophecy that resulted in him killing harpies that bothered Phineus, crossing the Sympeglades, and arriving in Colchis. King Aeetus asked this figure to sow the teeth of the Sleepless Dragon, who he was able to pass thanks to Medea's help. For 10 points, name this leader of the Argonauts, a Greek hero who recovered the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Jason [or Yason; or Easun; do not accept Aeson]

Result: 2001 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - Princeton A + Cornell.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 15841

Question: The image of this figure on his mount is associated with three interlocking triangles, the Valknut. This god worked for Baugi and seduced Gunnlod to obtain a substance made from Kvasir's blood. Along with Vili and Ve, this god was the son of Borr and Bestla. This god's possessions include the throne Hlidskjalf and the ring Draupnir. This god receives half of the Einherjar in Valhalla, where they are served by his Valkyrie messengers. After making a trip to Mimir's Well, this god lost one eye. Huginn and Muninn are ravens loyal to, for 10 points, what chief Norse deity?

ANSWER: Odin [or Woden; or Wotan; or anything like that]

Result: 2002 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - Rice + Michigan.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 15858

Question: The Voluspa states that this figure and his wife lie "under a grove of hot springs," and later refers to him as the brother of Byleist. This figure killed a man in the form of an otter, paying the weregild for that death with gold stolen from Andvari.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2003 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - RPI + MSU A.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 15875

Question: Honey-colored saffron clothes were worn by girls dressed as arktoi in the Brauronia, which was a celebration of this deity. This deity ran between Otus and Ephialtes, causing them to kill each other, and in another story, she substituted a deer for Iphigenia in the altar of sacrifice. King Oeneus forgot to worship this goddess, who angrily sent the Calydonian boar to ravage the land. After one of her attendants fathered Arcas, she transformed Callisto into a bear, but her most vengeful act was slaughtering the children of Niobe, who insulted her mother Leto. For 10 points, name this sister of Apollo and goddess of the hunt.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 2004 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - St. Anselm's + Truman State A.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 15905

Question: One of this woman's sons married Callirhoe and fathered the shepherd Geryon. Droplets of this figure's blood created the poisonous Saharan vipers and the corals of the Red Sea. This "fair-cheeked" sister of Stheno and Euryale was raped by Poseidon in the temple of a certain goddess. After this figure's death, Pegasus came into being and her head was mounted onto the aegis by Athena. This mortal figure was beheaded by a hero who was given a helmet of invisibility and winged sandals. For 10 points, name this Gorgon slaughtered by Perseus, whose gaze turned people to stone.

ANSWER: Medusa

Result: 2005 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - U Washingon A + South Carolina A.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 15907

Question: This god's wife is the mother of the snowshoe god Ullr. In one story, this god prevents the marriage of his daughter Thrudd by posing a series of riddles to the dwarf Alvis. This god's servant Thialfi loses a footrace to Thought in the land of Utgard Loki. This god dresses up as Freya to retrieve an object stolen from him by Thrym. The sons of Ivaldi make golden hair to replace the lock stolen from this god's wife Sif. This god's chariot is pulled by a pair of goats, and he will take nine steps after killing but being poisoned by the Midgard Serpent at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this Norse wielder of the hammer Mjollnir, the god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 2006 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - UCLA B.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 15936

Question: One animal of this type was slaughtered in the same town as Cteatus and Eurytus, a pair of Siamese twins who attacked the slayer of that animal near Cleonae. The slayer of that creature of this type was received by Molorchus and had 30 days to kill it. That creature of this kind was thought to have fallen from the moon after being born from Selene or alternately the offspring of Typhon and Echidna. Impervious to arrows, one of these animals was stunned by a club and had his pelt worn by its slayer after Eurystheus acknowledged the deed. For 10 points, name this kind of animal, whose Nemean variety was killed by Hercules on his first labor.

ANSWER: lion

Result: 2007 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - Vanderbilt + Iowa + Brown A.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 15965

Question: One animal of this type was given to Procris after she cured Midas's curse, but was turned to stone along with the Teumessian fox by Zeus. Four to six heads of this animal are attached to Scylla's waist, and one of them dies after being the first to see Odysseus on Ithaca. In addition to Laelaps, a two-headed Erytheian type of this animal belonged to Eurytion and protected the red cattle of Geryon. That animal, Orthrus, was the brother of another of these animals that frightens Eurystheus when Hercules brings him out of Hades on a labor. For 10 points, name this animal, examples of which are Sirius and the three-headed Cerberus.

ANSWER: dogs [or hounds; or other synonyms; accept wolf on the first clue]

Result: 2008 | ACF Fall | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Fall edited - Yale B + Northwestern A.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 15974

Question: The completely black bull Mnewis was regarded as an aspect of this god, who was served by the deity Mehen, and this god is the principal offspring of the ocean goddess Nu. This figure's children represent dryness and moisture, and his ba was the Bennu bird. He saved mankind from annihilation by creating 7000 jugs of beer mixed with pomegranate juice to distract the bloodthirsty Sekhmet. Syncretized with Horakhty, this god was the grandfather of Geb and Nut and father of Shu and Tefnut, and he staves off Apep every day while riding his barge. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god often combined with Atum and Amun, the chief solar deity.

ANSWER: Ra [or Re; accept anything that sounds like "rah" or "ray"]

Result: 2009 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r01- Brown.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 15991

Question: In one story, this figure was accompanied by Maera, the daughter of Proteus. This figure killed Chione after she boasted of sleeping with another deity, and helped to foil Alpheus' lust-filled plans by turning Arethusa into a fountain. As a child this figure removed a patch of hair from the chest of a Cyclopes, and in another story was attended by a group of twenty ocean nymphs. In addition to defeating Gration in battle, this figure once turned into an animal and ran between the Aloadae giants in order to trick them into killing each other. Often identified with the Minoan deity Britomartis, it was one of this figure's followers who gave birth to Arcas and was subsequently turned into a bear. In order to protect her family's name, she also slew Coronis, as well as the twelve offspring of Amphion after his wife, Niobe, insulted her mother. For 10 points, identify this figure who transformed Actaeon into a deer, the daughter of Leto and the twin sister of Apollo.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 2010 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r02- Brandeis.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 16028

Question: Sometimes said to live in fig leaves and banana plants, one of their kind kept two lambs as pets. When the lambs were stolen, that particular figure fled and took the form of a swan. Another tale describes how after eating a cake that fell out of a crow's mouth, another of these figures gave birth to Hanuman. Yet another of these figures was sent to distract Viswamitra and eventually gave birth to the "daughter of the furrow," Shakuntala. Although Anjana and Menaka are not mentioned in the Rig Veda, that text does describe the romance of King Pururavas and the most beautiful of them, Urvasi.Often paired with the Ghandarvas, who would provide music for them to dance to, they were known as the "Daughters of Joy."For 10 points, identify these nymphs of Hindu mythology who were said to reside in Indra's heaven.

ANSWER: Apsara(s)

Result: 2011 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r03- Harvard-Chicago B.doc | Question: 23 | Mythology | ID: 16057

Question: One of his sons was born from a lotus and represented the morning sun. Another of his sons, who was worshipped in Upper Egypt as an incarnation of Apedemak, was also known as the "Lord of the Massacre" and was represented as a man with a knife and the head of a lion. At some point, this deity absorbed the characteristics of the green skinned, ram headed, god of the risen land and silt, Tatenen. Also syncretized with the funerary god, Sokar, his consort is usually identified as Sekhmet, and his offspring appropriately includes the great architect Imhotep. Usually depicted as a mummified man grasping a scepter composed of the ankh, the was, and the djed, he was often accompanied by the great bull Apis and was primarily worshipped in the city of Memphis. For 10 points, identify this Egyptian creator god.

ANSWER: Ptah

Result: 2012 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r04- VCU.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 16069

Question: The "Amesbury Archer" is a possible king of these people, and the bronze swords found in the bogs near this group's population centers may be a basis for Arthurian myth. This group was the first in Britain to abandon communal burial mounds in favor of individual graves, and they also brought barley and other cereals to the island. Their namesake objects were often decorated with horizontal rows of fine-toothed stamps, and this group had extensive context with the Battle-Axe culture. For 10 points, name this neolithic group though to have had a hand in adding to a site started by the preceding megalith-builders, Stonehenge.

ANSWER: The Bell Beaker people/folk/culture, etc

Result: 2013 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r04- VCU.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 16075

Question: In order to make this deity descend from the heavens, two deities had a contest to determine who could see the furthest. In the end, it was Kadru who won the contest, but it was Suparni and her children, especially Jagati, who returned with this entity. This deity's many incarnations include a bird, a celestial bull, and even an embryo. According to one story this deity was married to the Nakshatras, the twenty-seven daughters of Daksha, and his punishment for favoring one of them over another explains the waxing and waning of the moon. The subject of an entire book of the Rig Veda, summoning this deity's most famous form involved the use of a stone mill to pound long plant stalks to extract the juice, which was subsequently mixed with milk and consumed by such figures as Agni and Indra. For 10 points, identify this mythological entity, a god of poetry and the moon, whose essence was consumed as a namesake drink of the gods.

ANSWER: Soma

Result: 2014 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r05- Illinois-Maryland.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 16087

Question: According to the myths of Central Africa, the Chiruwi, a half-man/half-spirit who must be captured before he divulges his medical knowledge, possesses this trait. In Japanese myth, it is the primary trait associated with the Nurikabe. A golden arrow given by Apollo to his priest, Abaris, temporarily enabled this ability. After the Milesians drove the Tuatha de Danann away from Ireland, the latter were said to have taken the form of the Aes Sidhe who often use this ability. According to Welsh legend, Merlin is said to live on Bardey Island in a glass house which could do this, while the Mabinogion tells the story of Luned's ring which endowed its wearer with this power. Also associated with the Ring of Gyges, before he sets out to kill Medusa, Perseus acquires this power by putting on a helmet given to him by Hades. For 10 points, identify this power that allows someone or something to not be seen.

ANSWER: the power of invisibility or becoming invisible or the ability to make something invisible [accept reasonable equivalents and be generous]

Result: 2015 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r06- Minnesota A.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 16123

Question: Aided by such men as Halitherses, this figure once took in a stranger from Pylos named Theoclymenus, who told him about a "bird of omen" he'd seen. Some stories claim that this figure married and fathered Perseptolis with a woman who'd once bathed him, Polycaste, while others claim that he married his possible half-sister Cassiphone or the princess Nausicaa. He learned of a prophecy of Proteus from Menelaus, whom he visited after leaving the court of Nestor, and he undertook those travels on the advice of Athena, who was disguised as Mentor. Palamedes once placed him in front of a plow to foil his father's attempts at avoiding a certain conflict by pretending to be mad. He would ultimately be reunited with his father in Eumaeus' hut. He would later help that father by clearing the palace halls of weapons in order to ambush a bunch of suitors. For 10 points, identify this prince of Ithaca, the son of Penelope and Odysseus.

ANSWER: Telemachus

Result: 2016 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r08- Missouri State-UCSD.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 16145

Question: This figure battled his son in the city ruled by the father of one of his wives and was killed there. After his death in Manipura, Ulupi used a charm to revive him. His other wives include Subhadra and Chitrangadi, with whom he fathered the son who killed him, Babhruvahana. This figure helped Agni burn the forests of Khandava and as a reward received the weapon Gandiva. Trained in the use of arms by Drona and Parasurama, he killed Jayadratha and Karna during the Kurukshetra War. He spent thirteen years in exile after losing at dice and fought alongside Nakula and Shadeva during a long conflict. Perhaps best known for a philosophical exchange with his divine charioteer, for 10 points, name this son of Indra, the third Pandu prince, whose conversation with Krishna comprises the Bhagavad Gita.

ANSWER: Arjuna [accept Bibhatsu, Gudakesa, Dhananjaya, Jishnu, Kiritin, Pakasasani, Phalguna, Savyasachin, Swetavahana, or Partha]

Result: 2017 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r09- UCLA-South Carolina.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 16166

Question: This deity is aided and attended by seven wise men called the Abgal. One myth concerning this god involves Shukaletuda's rape of another deity, and he fulfills his role as judge and mediator of disputes by defusing the situation. Sometimes depicted while holding the half-bird, half-man, Zu, this god once lost track of his divine powers, known as the Me, while drunk, and had to use demons created out of the dirt under his fingernails to track them down in the city of Uruk. His consorts included Ki and Ninhursag and his main center of worship was at the Abzu Temple in Eridu. This cleverest of the gods warned mankind of Enlil's flood and helped his son defeat Tiamat. For 10 points, name this Sumerian deity, the father of Marduk, whose semen created the Tigris and Euphrates and whom the Babylonians would identify with their own Ea.

ANSWER: Enki [accept Ea until the end]

Result: 2018 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r10- Dartmouth-Truman State.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 16186

Question: After getting wind of a conspiracy to overthrow Mt. Olympus, it was this figure that traveled to Tartarus and brought back the Hundred Armed giant, Briareos, to save Zeus. After a fight between Lycurgus and Dionysus, this figure sheltered the latter god and was given a Golden Vase. According to Alcman, this personage represented metallurgy, which may refer to her role rescuing Hephaestus after he was thrown into the sea. This sister of Eurynome and daughter of Nereus was resting in a cave on the coast of Magnesia when the King of Phthia cornered her, leading to a wedding that featured Eris throwing down the golden apple of contention. Better known is her decision to dip her son in the river Styx. For 10 points, identify this sea goddess who married Peleus and gave birth to Achilles.

ANSWER: Thetis

Result: 2019 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r11- Stanford.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 16219

Question: One story recounts how this figure's second son brought her rich robes from Sidon. Her mother has been said to either be Metope or Eunoe, while her father is traditionally said to be Dymas and her grandfather the river deity Sangarius. She succeeded Arisbe as queen after the latter was given to Hyrtacus, and some stories say she died at Cynossema after being turned into a dog. Her daughter Laodice was swallowed up by the earth, and her grandson was thrown off the walls of her city. This figure plotted to kill Polymestor's sons and unsuccessfully begged Odysseus to keep her daughter Polyxena alive. Another daughter of hers was raped by Ajax and taken as a concubine by Agamemnon, while her younger son was killed by Philoctetes and her eldest son was slain in revenge for Patroclus's death. For 10 points, name this mother of Cassandra, Paris, and Hector, the wife of Priam and queen of Troy.

ANSWER: Hecuba or Hecabe

Result: 2020 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r14- Editors 1.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 16292

Question: In one story, an enraged Diomedes took this figure's body and tossed it into the river Scamander. According to Quintus Smyrnaeus, this figure, who was arrayed in "flaming mail that resembled lightning," wielded a pair of spears and a halberd created by Eris; with these weapons, this figure killed such warriors as Machaon and Podarces. Chalon of Cyparissus met his end trying to defend this figure, while Cleite's ship was blown off course during a voyage to meet up and join this figure's expeditionary force, whose other members included Themodosa and an eventual successor, Antianara. It was this figure's purification at the hands of Priam that motivated this ruler to come to Troy. Shortly after this figure's death, the bow-legged Thersites mocked a certain Greek hero for falling in love with this woman's corpse. The daughter of Otrera and Ares, for 10 points, identify this sister of Hippolyta, a queen of the Amazons slain by Achilles.

ANSWER: Penthesilea

Result: 2021 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r15- Editors 2.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 16307

Question: Although this figure attempted to commit suicide by hanging, an old nursemaid saved this figure and, during the Festival of Ceres, helped to coordinate the central event in this figure's life. According to one story, the patriarch of this figure's family, who had sent Agamemnon a beautiful breastplate before the Trojan war, killed himself after losing a lyre playing contest to Apollo. That death occurred after this figure was chased away from Cyprus and ended up at Sabo. As punishment for not performing her rites, the goddess of love had caused this daughter of Cenchreis and Cinyras to lust after her father. That incestuous union ultimately resulted in the birth of a child, who was initially placed in a box, but grew up to become Aphrodite's lover. Also known as Smyrna, for 10 points, identify this tragic mythological figure who gave birth to Adonis after the gods had turned her into a namesake tree.

ANSWER: Myrrha [accept Smyrna before it is said]

Result: 2022 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r16- Magin.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 16329

Question: According to Pausanias, one of this woman's daughters married Oebalus after the death of her first husband Perieres, making that daughter the first woman to marry a second time. One of this woman's sons exiled Amphitryon from Mycenae for killing Electryon. According to Ovid's Metamorphoses, this woman's husband fought and defeated Thescelus and Ampyx during his battle for the right to marry her. This mother of Sthenelos and Gorgophone was betrothed to Phineus, but instead married a man who killed Cetus. After consulting the oracle of Ammon, her father Cepheus agreed to respond to a threatening flood-tide by abandoning her in Jaffa. Her mother boasted that she was the most beautiful of all the Nereids, causing this Ethiopian princess to be chained to a rock. For 10 points, name this daughter of Cassiopeia, who was rescued by the hero who slew the Gorgon, Perseus.

ANSWER: ndromeda

Result: 2023 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r19- Editors 5.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 16399

Question: According to one story, it was this deity, not Indra, who killed Vritra. In honor of this deity, grandmothers make a pentagram sign with honey on the tongue of newborn babes. In one story, it was the welling up of a great wave during the Churning of the Sea that brought this deity to life. In Bengal, plums are often eaten during this deity's namesake puja.Sometimes identified with Vach, offerings are made to this deity by schoolchildren before classes, as this deity was often credited with inventing the alphabet. According to one legend, this eight armed deity is born from the body of Gowri and forms a trinity with Kali and Lakshmi in the Devi Mahatmya.More commonly depicted dressed in white with a veena, or stringed instrument, in one her four arms, she is usually shown sitting on a lotus or riding the swan Hamsa. For 10 points, identify this Hindu goddess of music and learning, the consort of Brahma.

ANSWER: Saraswati or Sarasvati

Result: 2024 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r20- Editors 6.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 16433

Question: In one tale, this figure frees the bound Manassen and helps him drown his captor in a fountain.Another story revolves around this figure's flight from Ontlake. Sometimes identified with Duke Lianour as the ruler of the Castle of Maidens, this figure was often mentioned in the company of nine relatives.Though Layamon attributed some of this figure's deeds to a character called Argante, Sicilian tales about visions off of the Calabrian Coast refer to this figure's more commonly used name. Sometimes identified as the parent of Yvain, it was this lover of Accolon who sent the Green Knight to Camelot. First introduced in Geoffrey's Vita Merlini, this figure had the ability to shape-shift and fly.After a fateful battle on the River Camlan, it is this ruler of the Isle of Apples who bears her half-brother's body away. For 10 points, identify this daughter of Ygraine and half-sister of King Arthur, a sorceress and queen of Avalon.

ANSWER: Morgan le Fay or Morgen

Result: 2025 | ACF Nationals | 2009 | Round: r21- Editors 7.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 16456

Question: During it, a pair of sisters made themselves pregnant with sticks. It also saw the revenge of a thrush, who flooded the earth. Lucien Levy Bruhl discussed its structure and referred to it as the Alcheringa. However, its more common name was coined in 1896 from an Arunta word which precipitated a controversy between Pastor Strehlow and the research team of Gillen and Spencer, who coined its name. During it, a creature now said to live under a waterfall in Kakadu arose and released all of the animals in its belly. In addition to the awakening of Ngalmudj, the Rainbow Serpent, its climax saw the retreat of the spirit ancestors and the formation of such sacred sites as Uluru, commonly known as Ayers Rock. Also known as "the World Dawn," for 10 points, identify this primordial mythological period of the Australian Aborigines.

ANSWER: The Dreamtime or The Dreaming

Result: 2026 | ACF Regionals | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Regionals - Alabama A + VCU.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 16465

Question: **In Persian mythology Tahmurath was defeated by Angra Mainyu near one of these known as Alburz, and O-yama-tsumi-no-mikoto was a deity of one of these objects, which was created after the cutting up of Kagutsuchi. In Mayan legend the hero twins killed the giant Zipacna with one of these, and in the Ramayana, Hanuman carried one of these called Dronagiri to Rama because a particular herb grew on it. The chain Gleipnir was made from the roots of one of these objects and Greek examples include Cylenne, Helicon, and Parnassus. For 10 points, name these geographical features which include the dwelling place of the Greek pantheon, Olympus.

ANSWER: mountains (accept "volcanoes" due to ambiguities)

Result: 2027 | ACF Regionals | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Regionals - CMU.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 16516

Question: **He was almost killed by Gjalp and Greip, who after offering him a chair, tried to crush him by pushing him against the ceiling. This man ripped off Arvandil's toe and threw it into the sky, creating a new star. Two of his possessions could reheal themselves unless their bones were damaged, which Roskva did and subsequently became his handmaid. The gods angered him by promising his daughter to Alvis as a wife, but he turned Alvis to stone by keeping him busy until the sun rose. He wears the belt Megingjord and accidentally kicked Lit into Baldur's funeral pyre. His servant Thjalfi defeated a clay monster and his son Magni was the only one who could lift the giant Hrungnir off of him. For 10 points, name this god who defeated Hrungnir and Geirrod with his hammer, Mjolnir.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 2028 | ACF Regionals | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Regionals - Dartmouth A + Alabama B.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 16559

Question: **This civilization believed that humans had two souls, one of which returned to its place of origin after death. One deity of these people changed herself and her son into rocks after she was impregnated by a fruit made of sperm. These people were allegedly founded when four brothers and four sisters came out of the Tavern of Dawn. They believed that the world was created when a god sometimes known as Con-Tiki emerged from Lake Collasuya. These people also believed that their second ruler, Sinchi Roca, was son of a deity, who taught the art of spinning to mankind. That deity, Mama Ocllo, was the daughter of a sun deity, who was worshipped in the festival Raymi, Inti. For ten points, name this civilization, which worshiped deities like Illyapa and Viracocha, and was centered at Cuzco.

ANSWER: Inca or Incan

Result: 2029 | ACF Regionals | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Regionals - Dartmouth B + Iowa.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 16570

Question: **This figure is sometimes credited with founding the coastal city of Ardea in Latium, while in a less-popular version of one myth she is impregnated by her father's brother Proetus. She was taken in by the fisherman Dictys after arriving on the island of Seriphus, having washed ashore on the island within a locked up wooden chest. In Seriphus this figure garned the attention of Dictys' brother King Polydectes, who stumbled upon a convenient way to dispose of her son when he arrived to his court without a gift. Earlier, her father Acrisius had locked her in a bronze tower after hearing a prophecy that this figure's son would kill him, forcing Zeus to take innovative means to reach her. For 10 points, name this mother of Perseus, impregnated by Zeus in the form of a golden shower.

ANSWER: Danae

Result: 2030 | ACF Regionals | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Regionals - Minnesota (final).doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 16601

Question: One figure of this name, a son of Ares and Cyrene who was a king of the Bistones, was killed by a man accompanied by Abderus. Another figure of this name found his wife Aegiale living in adultery with Cometes shortly after being robbed by Demophoon on the coast of Attica. He was accompanied to Troy by Euryalus and Sthelenus, who like this man were members of the Epigoni, and he and Odysseus won over Philoctetes and stole the Palladium. Apollo brought Aeneas to Pergamos after this man wounded him, and this son of Tydeus halted Trojan attacks by wounding Aphrodite and Ares with the help of his protectress Athena. For 10 points, identify this Greek hero who shares his name with the Thracian king who owned the target of Heracles's eighth labor, a bunch of flesh-eating horses.

ANSWER: Diomedes

Result: 2031 | ACF Regionals | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Regionals - Orth-Bentley.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 16644

Question: **One punishment given to this god involved plucking out his hair and removing his nails, and he also had to provide 1000 tables of tribute to the other gods. This figure tested his future son-in-law by forcing him to retrieve an arrow from a burning field and sleep in a room of scorpions. His daughter Suseri-Hime ran away with Okuni-Nushi after his hair was tied to the roof. After he turned the only surviving daughter of an elderly couple into a comb, he defeated an eight-headed dragon and obtained the sword Kusangi. After he threw a flayed horse through the ceiling of his sister's sewing room, he was banished to Izumo For 10 points, name this brother of Amaterasu, the Shinto god of storms.

ANSWER: Susanoo-o-no-Mikoto

Result: 2032 | ACF Regionals | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Regionals - Orth-Bentley.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 16648

Question: **Barry Lopez explored the role of these animals among several cultures in Of [Them] and Men. The Navajo word mai-cob meant both witch and this animal, with witches dressing up as them to rob graves. Although the "everyday religion" of the Shoshoni worshiped Tam Apo, their mythology viewed this animal as the supervisor of the world. The people of Gubbio ended up mourning of these animals following its interaction with a certain saint, and in Norse mythology, a giantess from the Iron Wood gave birth to two of them, and another pair of them named Geri and Freki belonged to Odin. For 10 points, name this animal exemplified in Norse mythology by Hati, Skoll and Fenrir.

ANSWER: Wolf [or Wolves]

Result: 2033 | ACF Regionals | 2009 | Round: 2009 ACF Regionals - Toronto - Yale.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 16655

Question: In one account, this figure died after a group of handmaidens dressed as the Furies and hung her from a tree; in that account, she was driven from her home by Nicostratus and found refuge with Tlepolemus and Polyxo. In another story, Hermes created an image of this woman out of clouds while she took refuge in Egypt. Her daughter Hermione later married Neoptolemous, and this daughter of Tyndareus

ANSWER: Helen of Troy

Result: 2034 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: Brown University and Notre Dame | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 53402

Question: This figure's counselors were called the annunaki, and in one story, Kakka or Kadda is sent by Anu to bring this figure food from a banquet. This figure's first husband was sent to punish Gilgamesh and Enkidu for killing Humbaba and was associated with the present-day constellation of Taurus, and this goddess's main temple was located at Cuthah. Kalatarru and Kurgarru were sent to sprinkle the food and water of life on one of this figure's victims. Her other husband was Nergal, who was greeted by her son Namtar before courting her. In that myth, this figure forced her sister to strip naked at seven gates at the entrance to Irkala and then killed her. FTP, name this sister of Innana and ruler of the underworld, the Sumerian goddess of death.

ANSWER: Ereshkigal

Result: 2035 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: Carnegie Mellon University and University of Central Florida | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 53433

Question: According to one story of this deity's origin, he was one of four brothers, with two of his brothers being red and black, and this god was supposedly born with no flesh on his bones. Symbols associated with this god included white heron feathers as well as a fire serpent. This god's association with good governance and trade resulted in his association with Paynal, and in one ceremony dedicated to this god men who ate an image of this god made from corn would then serve him for a year. Also known as the Turquoise Prince, this god led his people to their home from the Place of the Seven Caves, and he shared the Templo Mayor with a moisture deity. Also believed to have been born in full regalia to the goddess Coatlicue, this god killed his sister Coyolxauhqui, and like Quetzlcoatl, he was a brother of Tezcatlipoca. For ten points, identify this Aztec god of war who is associated with a hummingbird.

ANSWER: Huitzilopochtli

Result: 2036 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: Chicago Culture Heroes and Psychopomps | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 53444

Question: Verbti, a blind Albanian god with perfect hearing, was associated with the north wind and this phenomenon, and in Aztec myth the creator god Ometecuhtli was associated with this. In Japanese myth, a god associated with this phenomenon produced 8 gods when he was cut up by his father, who was distraught because that god's birth killed his mother. In Indian myth, the god of this also serves as the messenger of the gods and acceptor of sacrifices, and licks up butter with his 7 tongues, while in Norse myth, the personification of this phenomenon wins an eating contest in the hall of Utgard-Loki by devouring a boar together with its bones. FTP, name this natural phenomenon associated with Agni and Kagutsuchi, who produced 8 volcanoes after his birth burnt his mother Izanami to death.

ANSWER: fire [accept gods of fire]

Result: 2037 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: Editor's Packet 1 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 53475

Question: In Egyptian custom, these objects were often left in tombs to assist the dead in their transition, and one of these belonging to Khufu was unearthed from pits at the Pyramids in Giza. Sampsa Pellervoinen gathers the materials necessary for the creation of one of these objects, while creating another of these requires the use of a sacred piece from Dodona. At the end of the Kalevala, Vainamoinen uses a copper one of these to leave the earth, while in Norse myth, one of these called Hringhorn is burned with its owner Balder. Surt owns one of these made of the nails of dead men and called Naglfar, while Frey possess one of these objects that can be folded and put into his pocket and is called Skidbladnir. For ten points, identify these objects, one of which was owned in Greek myth by Jason and was named Argo.

ANSWER: ship or boat

Result: 2038 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: Editor's Packet 2 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 54788

Question: This characters parents are infrequently given as Sileinos and Melia, and like other members of his race, he was buried under the Taphiassos, where he caused the air to stink and the water to become polluted. This character had to flee Pholos' cave after Pholos angered a guest asking for wine. Likhas inadvertently assisted this character in obtaining his revenge, and this character was instructed by Aphrodite as a result of her jealousy over Adonis. More generally considered to be the son of Nephele and Ixion, in his most famous role, he convinced a woman to take some of his bodily fluids to use as a love charm, although it turned out to be poisonous. For ten points, name this centaur who acted as a ferryman at the Euenos, where he was killed by Heracles and tricked Deianara into killing him.

ANSWER: Nessus

Result: 2039 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: Editor's Packet 3 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 54811

Question: This god was sometimes required to appear in Duat, where he achieved his most important task. Some myths attribute the birth of Khepri to this god, who was believed to intervene on both sides of mortal battle so that neither side could attain true victory. He sometimes attained the aspect of A'an, which required him to don a baboon's head, and this god is responsible for mediating the conflict between Heru-Bektet and Set, as well as between Ra and Apep. The masculine counterpart to Seshat, this god notably bet with Khonsu and won part of the moon's light, and during the process of judging for the afterlife, this god weighed the hearts of mortals against the feather of truth, or Ma'at. For ten points, identify this Egyptian god, who invented writing and had the head of an ibis.

ANSWER: Thoth [accept Djehuty]

Result: 2040 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: Harvard | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 55352

Question: Didymus holds that her name was originally Arnacia, and that she got her better-known name from the birds that fed her after Nauplius tossed her into the sea; another uncommon tradition places her as the mother by Hermes in the shape of a ram of Pan, possibly confusing her with a similarly named nymph. She becomes the mother of Italus after marrying Telegonus in one tradition, while earlier her father Icarius had forced her husband to beat him in a footrace to marry her. She wisely tells her servant Eurykleia to move her husband's bed, which cannot be done, and her other household servants includes the swineherd Eumaeus and the cowherd Philoetius. She cleverly promises to make a certain decision once she finishes weaving a shroud for her father-in-law, Laertes; when that fails after three years, she sets up a challenge involving shooting an arrow through twelve axes. Tolerating men like Agelaus and Antinoos, for 10 points, identify this ever-faithful mother of Telemakhos and wife of Odysseus.

ANSWER: Penelope

Result: 2041 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: Lawrence University and Georgia Tech | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 55375

Question: This type of deity is represented in Aboriginal myth by Knowee, a mother in search of her child, while the Ashanti deity of this is Lisa, also known as Nyankopan. A god of this type was originally known as the "Scabby One" and was named Nanauatzin, though in later that role was assumed by Tonatiuh. In the Kalevala, this role is filled by Pasivas, while in another mythos this role is filled by the daughter of Mundilfari. The Celtic god of this type threw a stone ball into the evil eye of his grandfather Balor, while in Chinese myth, it is symbolized by a raven in a circle, and the divine archer, Shen Yi, uses it as his palace and shoots down nine false ones. The Norse tradition holds that it will be devoured by Skol at Ragnarok, and Amenhotep IV's worship this as the one true god led him to change his name to Akhenaten. For 10 points, name this celestial body associated with Ra and Helios.

ANSWER: sun (gods)

Result: 2042 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: Minnesota A and Dartmouth A and South Detroit University | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 55441

Question: This deity was supported by eleven beings, and along with another god was often depicted on the doors of an Akitu house. The minister Gaga was once sent to give a speech describing this figure's actions to two other gods. The guards of another deity, who were known asgirtablilu or aqrab-amelu, were originally created by this figure in the form of Ummu-Hubur, and Anshar and Kishar were her grandchildren. The gatekeepers Lahmu and Lahamu were the children of this figure, and her tears were the source of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. She was the first possessor of the Tablet of Destinies, and Enki killed her first consort, Apsu. She died after attempting to swallow the seven winds, after which she was pierced by the invincible spear of the god that had killed Kingu. Eventually formed into the universe by Marduk, for 10 points, identify this primordial saltwater dragon from Babylonian myth.

ANSWER: Tiamat [accept Thalatte]

Result: 2043 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: UC Irvine and Michigan State A | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 55486

Question: In one story, he escapes a daily shaving with the help of a sword that could fight by itself. In another story, he is tasked with capturing some hornets, a python, and a leopard, in order to buy all stories known to the world. He discovers the true name of Baduasemanpensa after dropping a bunch of kola fruit, but the lizard steals her hand in marriage, because this figure could only beat out her name on a drum. He discovers the moon in a forest, and it is placed in the heavens because Nyame could not decide which of this figure's six sons most deserved it, and he is outsmarted by getting stuck to either a Wax Girl or a Tar Baby. For 10 points, name this trickster figure of West Africa and the West Indies, often depicted as a spider.

ANSWER: Anansi [accept Kweku-Anansi]

Result: 2044 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: UCLA B + Iowa | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 55508

Question: This figure is frequently associated with the constellation Ursa Major, whose stars are said to be his footprints, while he shared many similarities with the storm god Hurakan. As the patron god of slaves he punished cruel masters, and he was said to preside over the commoner schools known as telpochcalli. In one story he abducts the flower goddess Xochiquetzal from her husband Tlaloc. In another myth he sacrificed his right foot to kill the primordial crocodile Cipactli, after which he was granted lordship over the First Sun. His most famous possession was a magic smoking mirror, with which he tricked his benevolent archrival into immolating himself. Synonymous with the Jaguar God Tepeyollotli, For ten points, name this Aztec god of the night and the destructive counterpart of Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca [prompt on "Jaguar God" or "Tepeyollotli" before mentioned]

Result: 2045 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: UCSD and Washington and St Louis and Chicago B | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 55825

Question: One of his sons was seduced by Chimaera and blinded by Nomia for his infidelity, and besides fathering Daphnis, he laid freshly stripped hides on a road in order to rape Apemosyne. When caught in an immoral act by Battos, he turned him into a stone, and he turned Heirax into a hawk to prevent himself from getting caught further. With the daughter of Myrmidon, Eumolpeia, he fathered the herald of the Argonauts, Aethalides. Also the father of Autolycus, his birth was marked by an altercation between Silenus and Cyllene over where he got the cow gut for the musical instrument he used to lull his mother Maia to sleep, while he also stole the cattle of Apollo. This god also had a child with Aphrodite which was both male and female, and he owns both the cadeucus and the winged sandals. For 10 points, name this Greek god, the herald of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 2046 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: University of Illinois A and Missouri State A and University of South Carolina A | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 55843

Question: Alternate names for this being include "Aparana", or "one who starves" and "Uma" or "don't". Her father was the king of the Mountains, Hamavan, and she is the reincarnation of a being that lends her name to a type of self immolation. One myth about her posits that Guari got her golden skin from this being after she replaced her own after being teased and another states that she created a guardian out of paste and gave life to it to guard her while bathing, though her consort would decapitate that guardian in anger, only to be forced to return him to life and replace his lost head. With her consort she is the mother of Skandi and Ganesh, while with Saraswati and Lakshmi she makes up the Tridevi. For 10 points, name this supreme Shakti and reincarnation of Sati, the wife of Shiva.

ANSWER: Parvati

Result: 2047 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: University of Illinois A and Missouri State A and University of South Carolina A | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 55858

Question: He came to the aid of Amymone when a satyr assaulted her, and for a wedding present, he gave Xanthus and Balius to Peleus. His offspring include the king who sent Jason on the quest for the Golden Fleece and the first priest of the Eleusinian mysteries, who was taught by this deity's sister Benthesikyme. Caeneus asked to be turned into a man after being raped by this god, and it was this god who induced Pasiphae's lust for a bull he sent to Minos. Along with Apollo, this god was welched on by the king of Troy, for whom he built some exceedingly tall walls. Fathering the second generation of Cyclopes, including Polyphemus, he caused the death of Hippolytus as fulfillment of one of three curses he gave to his son Theseus. For, identify this Greek god of earthquakes and horses, who may be better known as the brother of Hades and Zeus who lived in and ruled the sea

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 2048 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: University of Pittsburgh A and Walter Johnson High Schoo | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 55877

Question: This figure is associated with the mystery cult at Samothrace that worships the Cabeiri, who are sometimes known as his sons. Some of his other offspring include the inventor of the flute and a wrestler who defeats everyone he faces and proceeds to kill them. Those two, Ardalus and Cercyon, both came from his relationship with the Thracian nymph Cabiro. One of his more famous offspring became the king of Athens after expelling Amphictyon. That king was Ericthonius, and came from this figure's failed attempt to rape Athena. According to Homer, he had a wife named Aglaea, one of the Graces, but they did not have any children. This might be because of his incredibly grotesque features that also caused Hera to throw him from Mount Olympus. For 10 points, name this Olympian who created Achilles's armor and the Aegis breastplate, the god of fire and metallurgy famous for being lame.

ANSWER: Hephaestus

Result: 2049 | ACF Winter | 2009 | Round: Virginia Commonwealth University | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 55404

Question: In Korean myth, one of these becomes a beautiful woman and marries Hwanung after praying in a cave for 100 days and in a Carolingian romance the twin brother of Valentine is raised by these creatures. In the Kalevala, Louhi sends one of these named Otso to ravage Wainola and one of these creatures, believed to be the incarnation of Chira-Mante-Kamui, is sacrificed by a certain tribe during a festival called Iomante. The sinews of this animal are one of the six components of the chain Gleipnir which binds Fenris to a rock and a follower of Artemis who was tricked by Zeus into giving birth to Arcas was turned into one of these. The object of a cult among the Ainu, for 10 points, identify these animals whose skins were worn by berserkers wore and mythological examples of which include Callisto who was turned into the constellation Ursa major.

ANSWER: bears

Result: 2050 | BATE | 2009 | Round: Finals 1.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 16676

Question: Also referred to as Ienpw, according to the Pyramid Texts, he is the father of Qeb-hwt, or "Cooling Water."

ANSWER: Anubis

Result: 2051 | BATE | 2009 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 16714

Question: He criticized his brother for marrying a Cushite, and in battle against the Amalekites he held up his brother's arms.

ANSWER: Aaron

Result: 2052 | BATE | 2009 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 16728

Question: His mother also raised Arcas as her own. Among the epithets given to this god are Ctesius, or "protector of property," and Psychopompus.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 2053 | BATE | 2009 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 16781

Question: This god took the form of a falcon to rescue Idun from Thrymheim, and he was captured by Geirrod in hawk form. It was he who gave Andvaranaut to King Hreidmar.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2054 | BATE | 2009 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 16815

Question: In one legend, it was he who made Vulcan's underground palace and the walls around Sicily and was able to walk on water.

ANSWER: Orion

Result: 2055 | BATE | 2009 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 16845

Question: The driver of a chariot drawn by gib-cats, she was born during her father's stay in Asgard after the resolution of the war between the Aesir and Vanir.

ANSWER: Freya

Result: 2056 | BATE | 2009 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 16876

Question: He once owned a calf that changed its colors like a blackberry, and he was succeeded by Lycastus.

ANSWER: Minos

Result: 2057 | Chicago Open | 2009 | Round: 2009 Chicago Open - Finals 1.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 16906

Question: In The Iliad, one King from this polity goes into a frenzy and kills Itymoneus and Agelaos after Paris errantly shoots Euenor, and* Nestor nostalgically recalls a war with this polity over grazing rights. A legendary set of twins from this polity were supposedly born conjoined from a silver egg after Poseidon seduced their mother, Queen Molione of Boupraison. The port city of Kyllene in this polity lay across from the island of Doulikhion, whose most famous King was Meges, while the throne of another of this polity's cities was seized after Myrtilos sabotaged the chariot of King Oinomaos. Foreknowledge of his death led the legendary founder of this polity to hold a chariot race among his sons for the throne, and this polity's royal line traces its roots back through Aethlios to Deucalion. Herakles twice invaded this Kingdom after being offended after his fifth labor by its King, Augeius, and after winning he established an altar to a legendary King of one of this polity's other cities, Pelops. Also containing Pisa, this is, for ten points, what ancient Kingdom allegedly founded by Endymion?

ANSWER: Elis or Helia (accept Doulikhion before *)

Result: 2058 | Chicago Open | 2009 | Round: Packet 01 - Mike Sorice Sure Does Turn in His Questions Late.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 16945

Question: This man rescues his beloved from a pack of 100 lust-crazed, club-wielding lepers after making a great leap from a chantry to escape his captors.

ANSWER: Sir

Result: 2059 | Chicago Open | 2009 | Round: Packet 02 - Rusk and Romanians.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 16975

Question: In one story he accompanies a gambler who incurs the wrath of the gods after marrying a sacred maiden.

ANSWER: Kokopelli

Result: 2060 | Chicago Open | 2009 | Round: Packet 03 - The Young Heiglians.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 16988

Question: One of these figures served as an arbitrator in a dispute between Helios and Poseidon over the isthmus of Corinth and has an alternate name that means "goatish." That figure was married to Kymopoleia, with whom he sired the nymph Oiolyka. One of them was called upon to aid Thetis in releasing Zeus from the chains with which he was bound by Hera and Apollo, and these figures are sometimes identified with the Tritopatores.

ANSWER: Hundred-Handed Ones

Result: 2061 | Chicago Open | 2009 | Round: Packet 04 - Ragged Dick and the Algerian Heroes.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 17017

Question: This Navajo equivalent of this kind of person is known as the

ANSWER: werewolf

Result: 2062 | Chicago Open | 2009 | Round: Packet 05 - Beiyang Army_ROMola.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 17023

Question: One queen of this place married Epopeus after she was seduced by Zeus and was given as a slave to Dirce by her father Nycteus. Another daughter of a king of this city gave birth to Mopsus and was forced to oversee the oracle of Apollo at

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 2063 | Chicago Open | 2009 | Round: Packet 07 - Incarcerated Scarfaces.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 17081

Question: One figure in this myth system assists the depilation by tweezers of several figures by holding up a mirror, and another is an infernal deity that receives child sacrifices and brings nightmares. This mythology contains a demon with a vulture-like beak and snake hair that presides over a board game and is named Tuchulcha. One indigenous god of this people wears a conical hat, wields an axe, and serves as a forge figure, while a creature with eyes on its wings in this myth system guides the deceased to the underworld wielding a torch. In addition to (*) Sethlans and Vanth, this mythology contains the winged deity Svutaf and two characters who founded twelve cities, as well as a plant god of revelry, Fufluns. Most of the deities in this myth system were alluded to in the Piacenza Liver, and its underworld is governed by Aita. Its chief trinity consists of Uni, Menrva, and its chief scepter-wielding deity, Tinia. For 10 points, name this system of beliefs held by an Italic culture that was defeated at the battle of Veii by the Romans.

ANSWER: Etruscan

Result: 2064 | Chicago Open | 2009 | Round: Packet 08 - The Lady's Not for Byrning.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 17101

Question: The only surviving fragment of a play about these figures notes that the weavers are "striking up the wise shuttle's songs" and describes an unspecified figure "gluing together the chariot's rail". One of these figures shares his name with the brother of Jason, while another fathered Cylarabes and Cometes and a third lost a wrestling match to Epeius at the funeral games of Oedipus. One of these figures fathered Tisamenus with Demonassa and, before he could fight in the Trojan War, was killed by

ANSWER: the

Result: 2065 | Chicago Open | 2009 | Round: Packet 12 - Geto Boyz Play Songs of Love.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 17164

Question: In one myth, this deity seduced a wanderer, so that the other gods cut off that wanderer's head and replaced it with a scorpion. According to the Florentine Codex, one god strongly associated with this deity was said to preside over sweat baths. That deity was said to have been created when a war god flayed a certain princess, who then apotheosized. Under one of this deity's epithets, this deity was portrayed as a series of siblings, while in another incarnation she is described as the Mother of the Gods, and protected midwives and fortune tellers. In addition to her epithet Ixcuinan, this goddess was, with (*) Tezcatlipoca, one of the two divinities of confession. This goddess gave birth to the flower goddess Xochipilli and the maize god Centeotl, and although this goddess could be confessed to only once in a lifetime, that confession would absolve the confessor of a certain capital crime. This goddess was described as a cotton wearing, skin-carrying, child-eating hag in her traditional form. For 10 points, name this crazy Aztec goddess, who presided over crazy sex, dirt, and gambling, as well as STDs.

ANSWER: Tlazolteotl

Result: 2066 | Chipola Lit + Fine Arts | 2009 | Round: 4.doc | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 17516

Question: The horse of Adrastus was one son of this god, who was endowed with the gift of human speech because his parents were Demeter and this character. Another son of this god fathered Lernus by Philyra and founded the city of Naupila, and one son of this god became the king of Eleusis after the death of Cercyon. One lover of this god was buried alive by her father before being turned into a spring, and he raped a female warrior before changing her into a man. For 10 points-name this father of Naupilus and Hippothoon and lover of Alope and Caenaeus, the Greek god of earthquakes and the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 2067 | Chipola Lit + Fine Arts | 2009 | Round: 6.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 17550

Question: In one story, this character was dangled by a rope from a tree by Adamanthea, while another story concerning this character claims that this man was raised by the goat Amalthea nearby a group of noisy Kouretes. A nymph named Chelone was changed into a tortoise when she failed to attend this character's wedding, and this character's wife was hung upside down after attempting to drown one of his sons. That son of this character was chosen by him to help defeat a tribe of earth-born Giants, and was born to this character by the mortal woman Alcmene. For 10 points-name this father of Heracles, who may be better known for being the chief god of the Greek pantheon.

ANSWER: Zeus

Result: 2068 | Chipola Lit + Fine Arts | 2009 | Round: 8.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 17598

Question: One character in this work becomes pregnant after eating a lingonberry and gives birth to an unnamed son who is later named king by Ukko. Another character in this work is the brother of Untamo and later uses magic to change cows into bears before killing himself in a berserk rage. In addition to Kullervo, one character in this work plays a kantele made from the jaw-bone of a giant fish and visits the belly of the ground giant Antero Vipunen, and that character, along with Lemminkainen and Seppo Ilmarinen, later steals the Sampo from the people of Pohjola. For 10 points-name this work, featuring the heroic shaman Vainamoinen, a compilation of Finnish folklore by Elias Lonnrot.

ANSWER: Kalevala

Result: 2069 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 01 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 17631

Question: Drinking from this mythological figure's two fountains brought poetic inspiration since the Muses considered both of this figure's Aganippe and Hippocrene fountains to be sacred. This figure's brother fornicated with Callirrhoe, resulting in the birth of Geryon and Echidna. That brother, Chrysaor, ruled over Iberia instead of living on Mount Helicon like this figure. This figure was ordered to ascend a mountain but was attacked by a gadfly sent by Zeus. He was born after Perseus beheaded Medusa while he later helped slay the Chimera with Bellerophon. For 10 points, name this Greek mythological creature resembling a white winged horse.

ANSWER: Pegasus [or Pegasos]

Result: 2070 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 02 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 17645

Question: As a result of a flood, this mythological feminine figure's daughter married the Greek analog of Utnapishtim and Noah. Orestheus, Amphictyon, and Hellen were born as a result of that marriage between Deucalion and her daughter, Pyrrha. She was adorned with a crown and necklaces by the Horae and Graces before marrying the brother of Prometheus, Epimetheus. She was created by Hephaestus and was taught seductive gifts by Athena and Aphrodite. The Greek analog of Judeo-Christianity's Eve, for 10 points, name this Greek mythological figure who released all the evils of the world, leaving only hope remaining in her namesake box.

ANSWER: Pandora

Result: 2071 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 03 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 17665

Question: Mettus Curtius defeated this ruler's general Hostus Hostillus during a certain conflict. During that conflict, a traitor, who opened the gates to this ruler's capital city in exchange for gold bracelets but would actually receive shields, was named Tarpeia. This ruler agreed to joint rule with Titus Tatius as a way to end that conflict which occurred after this ruler facilitated the Rape of the Sabine Women. His mother Rhea Silvia was buried alive after she gave birth to him as a result of being raped by Mars. Raised by the prostitute Acca Larentia who might have been a she-wolf, for 10 points, name this first king of Rome who was the twin brother of Remus.

ANSWER: Romulus

Result: 2072 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 04 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 17682

Question: Some epithets associated with one mythological figure of this name include "he who has eyes" and "Lord of the Two Lands." An early mythological figure of this name had four sons born from a lotus flower who he made protectors of the four cardinal directions. That mythological figure also had a cult centered at Letopolis. Another god with this name, raised on the island of Chemnis, performed the Opening of the Mouth ceremony. Usually represented as a falcon, for 10 points, name this Egyptian god who defeated his evil uncle Set and was the son of Isis and Osiris.

ANSWER: Horus [or Harus]

Result: 2073 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 05 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 17701

Question: This entity can cause an immortal to lose his or her voice for either nine or eighteen years. This entity converges with similar entities named Cocytus, Phlegethon, and Acheron. Due to this entity, Semele was killed by Zeus and Phaeton was killed by Helios. Thetis attempted to provide immortality by dipping Achilles into this entity. This river's bank serves as the hundred-year home of wandering souls who could not pay a toll after dying to Charon. For 10 points, name this river of hate which, by encircling a certain place nine times, separates Earth from the Greek Underworld.

ANSWER: Styx

Result: 2074 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 05 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 17710

Question: Dakshinamurthy is a form of this god facing south, while in another form this god vanquished Yama. As Ardhanari, this god possesses both male and female aspects and this god once procreated with Vishnu's avatar Mohini. This god swallowed the poison from the oceans to obtain amrita, turning his throat blue. Often depicted on a tiger skin, this god wields the trident and this god's worship symbol is the phallic lingam. He caught the river goddess Ganga in his hair and he burned Kama with his third eye. The father of Skanda, for 10 points, name this Hindu god, husband of Parvati and father of Ganesh, who is known as the destroyer god.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 2075 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 06 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 17726

Question: In "Obsolescence of Oracles," Plutarch claims that this mythological figure is the only Greek god that is dead. The nymph Pitys hid as a pine tree to escape this god who wrapped himself in a sheepskin to seduce Selene. Most often stated to be the son of Hermes and Penelope, this god was nurtured along with Zeus by Amalthea. During Titanomachy, this god blew his conch-shell to scatter the enemy and in another myth, this patron of Arcadia was responsible for the death of Echo. Taking his possession from Syrinx, for 10 points, name this Greek god of nature and pasture, depicted as half-man and half-goat, who often plays his namesake pipes.

ANSWER: Pan [or Faunus]

Result: 2076 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 07 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 17747

Question: According to High, two figures from this event live on Idavoll, and they, along with others, will cast playing pieces in gold. One figure of this event will give a gift to Skirnir, and during this event, the son of Hvedrung will suffer a similar fate. Preceded by six consecutive winters, Lif and Lifthrasir will hide in a tree during this event. One side will arrive at Vigrid via Nagalfar, while the opposing side will be summoned upon hearing the Gjallerhorn, which will be blown by Heimdall. For 10 points, name this event at which Odin and the Aesir will die, the final battle in Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Ragnarok

Result: 2077 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 08 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 17768

Question: Epithets given to this mythological figure include "Guardian of the Four Quarters" and "Restorer of Joy to Humankind". This four-eyed, four-eared mythological figure is credited with arranging the year into months, arranging the moon and the stars, and creating mountains from the udders of another deity. Also known as Bel, meaning "Lord", this god was chosen by the Annunaki to win back the Tablets of Destiny from Kingu. Sarpanitu was the consort of this son of Damkina and Ea who is best known for defeating the dragon Tiamat. For 10 points, name this chief Mesopotamian god of Babylon.

ANSWER: Marduk

Result: 2078 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 09 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 17786

Question: This mythological figure was worshipped in the Geminus and was associated with the Etruscan sky-god Ani. In one myth, this mythological figure shared a kingdom in Latium with Camese, with whom this mythological figure had a son. This mythological figure burned Romulus's men in retaliation for kidnapping the Sabine women. The lover of Carna and father of Tiberinus, this patron of janitors received a gift in return for his hospitality to Saturn. With a temple whose gates were always open during war, for 10 points, name this Roman god of beginnings and endings, who may have inspired the name of the first month.

ANSWER: Janus

Result: 2079 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 10 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 17808

Question: In one tale, this figure killed Otr with a sling and captured Andvari in the form of a pike with Ran's net. At the hall of Skrymir, this figure lost an eating contest to a personification of fire though he did help Thor recover Mjollnir in the guise of a bridesmaid. This mythological figure is the source of earthquakes, as poison drips from snakes dangled above this figure's head when this figure's wife Sigyn is not around to catch it. This figure slept with Angrboda to father Hel, Jormungand, and Fenrir. He was killed by Heimdall at Ragnarok and he had plotted for Hoder to use a mistletoe spear to kill Balder. For 10 points, name this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2080 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 11 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 4763

Question: This mythological figure killed the centaurs Hylaeus and Rhaecus after they tried to rape her, and this figure caused the death of two of Althaea's brothers. This mythological figure, the mother of Parthenopaeus, was turned into a lion after she consummated her marriage in a temple of Zeus, and Medea saved her life by healing a wound suffered fighting the Colchians. Raised by a she-bear after her father abandoned her, she participated in the Calydonian boar hunt as well as being an Argonaut, but she is better known for being distracted by some golden apples while racing Hippomenes. For 10 points, name this mythological huntress known for her foot speed.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 2081 | DAFT | 2009 | Round: DAFT 2009 Round 12 - Edited - Proofread.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 17836

Question: Inventions attributed to this mythological include the cultivation of rice and wheat as well as silkspinning and weaving, and this mythological figure's heirlooms such as magatama and kusanagi went to Ninigi. This ancestor of Jimmu took up the bow and quiver after an incident in which a sacred animal was thrown into this figure's palace. After the throwing of that horse, this mythological figure went into self-exile. Eventually coaxed to return by Tajikara-O and Ame-no-Uzume, for 10 points, name this Japanese goddess who was born out of Izanagi's left eye, the sibling of Tsukuyomi and Susanoo.

ANSWER: Amaterasu

Result: 2082 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2009 | Round: FKT Bellas.rtf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 17848

Question: In some myths he is mentioned as the husband of Hathor and the son of Ra, and he was initially worshipped as a war god. He killed many hippopotamuses and crocodiles during many battles that ended when this god won a boat race using a wooden boat compared to his adversary's stone boat. Those battles were to avenge the death of this god's father, who was killed by Set. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god who avenged his father Osiris and had the head and sometimes wings of a falcon.

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 2083 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2009 | Round: FKT Editor 1.rtf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 17888

Question: The Chinese goddess of this object lives with the Jade Rabbit, and the Japanese god of this object jumped out of Izanagi's eye and once lived with Amaterasu. Those were Chang'e and Tsukuyomi respectively. Ur was the sacred city to the Sumerian god of this object, Nanna, who was associated with the Semitic god of this object, Sin. The Norse god of this object stole Hjuki and Bil and is named Mani, and the Greek and Roman goddess of this object loved Endymion and has a sister named Eos. For 10 points, identify this celestial object that is also represented by the Greek Selene and Roman Luna.

ANSWER: the moon [accept equivalents]

Result: 2084 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2009 | Round: FKT Editor 3.rtf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 17936

Question: In one story, he disguised himself as a farm hand named Bolverk to gain access to a mead made from honey and the blood of Kvasir. Son of Bor and Bestla, he fathered Vidar with the giantess Grid. At one point, he hung from the world tree for nine days while pierced by his own spear. During that time, he learned nine powerful songs and eighteen runes. Tidings are brought to him by his two ravens, Huginn and Muninn. For 10 points, identify the Norse deity who is the father of Hod, Hermod, Balder, and Thor?

ANSWER: Odin [accept Wotan and Wodan]

Result: 2085 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2009 | Round: FKT Jonathan Graham 2.rtf | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 17964

Question: Murdering his music tutor with a lyre, getting drunk at a funeral, freeing Prometheus, founding the city of Taranto, and challenging the God of wine to a drinking contest are some of his more obscure adventures. He's perhaps better known for slaying the Nemean Lion, cleaning the Augean stables in a day, capturing the Cretan Bull, and stealing the Mares of Diomedes. For 10 points, name this hero from Greek mythology who's best known for defeating the Hydra.

ANSWER: Hercules or Heracles

Result: 2086 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2009 | Round: FKT Jonathan Graham.rtf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 17982

Question: This god was unable to talk when his mouth was stiched by dwarves, and he fathered Einmyria and Eisa with Glut. Geirrod captured this god, forcing Thor to rescue him, and this god also appeared as Thor's maid when Thrymr stole Mjollnir. This god also fetched back Idun's golden apples after Thiassi tricked him into stealing them, and he fathered Jormungand, Hel, and Fenrir with Angraboda. Chained with snake venom dripping on his head until Ragnarok for killing Baldur, for 10 points, name this trickster god of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2087 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2009 | Round: FKT Mike Bindis.rtf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 18003

Question: This god was born on the island of Delos, where his mother was taking refuge from the jealous rage of Hera. His rejection by Cassandra caused him to curse her with the ability to see only tragedies in the future. He turned Zephyrus into the wind after Zephyrus killed his lover Hyacinthus, and he had a notable encounter with Poseidon after both declared their love for Hestia. Although seemingly hapless when it came to relationships, Calliope did bear him a son who had the gift of playing beautiful music. This son of Zeus is, for 10 points, what father of Orpheus and Asclepius, lover of Daphne, and god of the sun?

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 2088 | Fall Kickoff Tournament | 2009 | Round: FKT Steven Wellstead.rtf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 18016

Question: An interaction with Pegasus earned this figure the appellation Chalinitis in Corinth, and this figure cast the deciding vote in the murder trial against Orestes. This figure helped Diomedes wound Aphrodite and Ares in the Trojan War, while later she disguised Odysseus as an old man upon his return to Ithaca. Tiresias was blinded upon seeing her bathing, and transgressions against her resulted in the notable transformations of Arachne and Medusa. For 10 points, identify this goddess born from the head of Zeus, the patron of Greece's capital city.

ANSWER: Athena [accept any correct epithets given with Athena]

Result: 2089 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round01.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 18037

Question: The commonly accepted etymology of this object's name is a metaphor for gallows, and one god pierced himself with a spear and hanged himself from this object for nine days and nights in his quest to attain wisdom. This object is cared for by the Norns, and the Aesir meet at the Well of Urd under this object. Its shaking is one of the portents of Ragnarok, the squirrel Ratatosk scurries across it, and it supports the nine realms. For 10 points, name this giant ash, the "World Tree" of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Yggdrasil

Result: 2090 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round02.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 18057

Question: One god of this people killed his sister shortly after being born to a mother who was impregnated by a ball of feathers. That god is often represented as a hummingbird, while another god's name means "Smoking Mirror." These people sacrificed children to their rain god and worshipped another deity whose name means "feathered serpent." For 10 points, name this Latin American civilization whose gods included Huitzilopochtli, Tezcatlipoca, Tlaloc, and Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Aztecs

Result: 2091 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round03.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 18086

Question: In one myth, this god arrived to protect his great-grandson using the plant moly. In addition to saving Odysseus from Circe, this grandson of Atlas not only invented the lyre and stole all of Apollo's cattle, but did it on the day of his birth. The god of thieves and crossroads and son of Maia, this bearer of the caduceus was assisted in his primary role by objects he once lent to Perseus, his winged sandals. For 10 points, name this counterpart of Mercury, the Greek messenger god.

ANSWER: Hermes [accept Mercury until "Odysseus"]

Result: 2092 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round04.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 18102

Question: Because of Zephyr, this god accidentally killed Hyacinthus during a discus throwing contest, and he also flayed the satyr Marsyas after a competition. His child with Coronis grew to become a skilled healer, and he fathered Ion in addition to Asclepius. This god of poetry and music pursued the nymph Daphne, who changed into a laurel tree. This god also slew the Python and established an oracle at Delphi. For 10 points name this son of Leto, the Greek god of prophecy and light.

ANSWER: Phoebus Apollo [accept either]

Result: 2093 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round05.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 18112

Question: One of these creatures with a woman's head was slain by Zeus in order to free the Cyclopes and Hecatonchires. Another had its teeth planted in a field by Jason, while a third possessed Andvari's gold. In addition to Fafnir and Nidhogg, one of these creatures, Ladon, guarded the golden apples of the Hesperides and another, which was holding a princess hostage, was slain by Saint George. For 10 points, name these really big mythological flying lizards that breathe fire.

ANSWER: Dragons Accept equivalents

Result: 2094 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round07.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 18150

Question: This man's son married Hippodamia, and his daughter turned to stone after the deaths of her fourteen children, Niobe. This king of Lydia's son possessed an ivory shoulder, as the real one was accidentally eaten by Demeter. This man had dined on nectar and ambrosia but made the mistake of attempting to deceive the gods by cooking his son Pelops. For 10 points name this figure from Greek myth punished in Tartarus by having food and water retreat from his grasp.

ANSWER: Tantalus

Result: 2095 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round08.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 18175

Question: This god and a mortal both slept with Aethra in one night, thereby fathering Theseus. This god interfered with the voyage of Odysseus after he blinded this god's son, the Cyclops Polyphemus, and this god known as Earthshaker was infuriated when his gift of a saltwater spring was outdone by Athena's olive tree to win the city of Athens. His children with his wife Amphitrite include his son Triton. For 10 points, name this creator of horses, the trident-wielding Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 2096 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round09.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 18193

Question: In Egyptian mythology, one of these was identified by markings on its forehead and tongue, taken to live in a temple until it was sacrificed, and thought of as the manifestation of the god Apis. Daedalus built a wooden one because a large white one sent by Poseidon was loved by Pasiphae, the wife of King Minos, and eventually became the father of the Minotaur. For 10 points, name these large creatures, the Cretan variety of which was taken away by Heracles and became the constellation Taurus.

ANSWER: bull or cow Accept equivalents

Result: 2097 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: Round10.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 18212

Question: This figure defeats a fire-breathing monster beneath the Aventine Hill, Cacus, in the Aeneid. Lovers of this figure included Iole and Deianira, who gave him a robe poisoned with the blood of Nessus, killing him. After his death, his bow and arrows were taken up by Philoctetes. Also notable for diverting a river to clean the Augean stables and for fighting the Nemean Lion, this is, for 10 points, what Greek hero who slew the Hydra as part of twelve labors employing his incredible strength?

ANSWER: Heracles or Hercules

Result: 2098 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round11.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 18226

Question: This warrior's wife would eventually settle in Epirus with Helenus, and Aeneas saved this warrior from Ajax. This man's son Astyanax was murdered by Neoptolemus and his own death resulted from the slaying of a man dressed in another's armor, Patroclus. After this man's death, he was dragged around the walls of Troy three times. For 10 points, name this mighty son of Priam, the husband of Andromache who was slain by Achilles.

ANSWER: Hector

Result: 2099 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round12.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 18261

Question: This faith experienced a revival under its country's National Learning movement, and this religion's god of thunder is known as Raijin. Its creation myth is centered on a spear stirred in the water, and the Ise Jingu is one of the most important of this religion's many shrines. Its deities include Uzume and Susanowo, as well as Izanami and Izanagi, and are known as kami. For 10 points, name this religion whose chief deity is Amaterasu, an animistic religion which originated in Japan.

ANSWER: Shintoism

Result: 2100 | Fall Novice | 2009 | Round: round12.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 18263

Question: Some sources conflate this god with the lunar god Khonsu. Also known as Djehuty and Hermes Trismegistus, he restored Horus' eye, and his cult was centered at Hermopolis. This god served as a mediator and also wrote the Book of the Dead. His consort was Ma'at, and at the judgment of the dead, he stood beside the scales and took down the result. For 10 points, name this powerful Egyptian god of magic, wisdom, and writing often represented as a baboon or an ibis.

ANSWER: Thoth

Result: 2101 | FICHTE | 2009 | Round: 01_fichte09.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 18277

Question: This figure sent eight thunder gods in pursuit of another after being pursued herself by a hag. The eighth woman to be born, she once threatened to kill 1000 mortals every day after being viewed by torchlight on a (*) comb. She had spoken first in greeting to the other deities, causing her to birth the leech child Hiruko, and her birthing of two fire deities killed her and sent her to Yomi. User of Ame-no-nuhoko along with her brother, for 10 points, name this goddess and consort of Izanagi.

ANSWER: Izanami

Result: 2102 | FICHTE | 2009 | Round: 02_fichte09.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 18298

Question: The Banded Eye god from this people's mythology is sometimes given as an aspect of their Maize god. This civilization expanded as far from their capital as Chalcatzingo, and while many of their monuments were found at Tres Zapotes, this civilization sometimes created stelae. (*) A more nearby major city was this civilization's site at modern day San Lorenzo. For ten points, identify this Mesoamerican civilization with a capital at La Venta, who may be better known for constructing large stone heads.

ANSWER: Olmec

Result: 2103 | FICHTE | 2009 | Round: 03_fichte09.doc | Question: 26 | Mythology | ID: 18343

Question: This figure made public the information that Midas had donkey ears after he was the sole individual to rule in favor of that king in a musical contest with Apollo. After his "great high house" was usurped by Neleus, he spent a year as a bondsman with (*) Phylacus, trying to woo Pero. In the best known story associated with this figure, he gained a third of the Kingdom of Argos after he cured the impotence of Prince Iphiclus. For 10 points, name this Greek seer that could talk to animals.

ANSWER: Melampous

Result: 2104 | FICHTE | 2009 | Round: 07_fichte09.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 18439

Question: He's not Tengri, but a dance named for him accompanies rounds of traditional Mongolian wrestling. Krishna's banner contains an image of this figure, who made himself small to avoid spikes (*) on the spokes of a wheel. His stepmother Kadru imprisoned his mother in Patala and mothered the creatures this being hates. This son of Vinita and Kashyapa retrieved amrita for the nagas and gained immortality from a deal made with Vishnu. For 10 points, name this bird, the mount of Vishnu.

ANSWER: Garuda

Result: 2105 | FICHTE | 2009 | Round: 09_fichte09.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 18497

Question: The Konungsbok and Hauksbok manuscripts provided slightly different catalogues of them. One of them was named Gandalfr, and four of them held up the dome of heaven fashioned from Ymir's skull. One of them hid in a waterfall in the form of a (*) pike, and another was Fafnir's brother. Two of them killing Gilling after making mead from the blood of Kvasir, and their ancestors include Motsognir and Dvalinn. For 10 points, name these creators of Skidbladnir and Mjollnir, a dimunitive race.

ANSWER: dwarfs [or dwarves; or Dvergar]

Result: 2106 | FICHTE | 2009 | Round: 10_fichte09.doc | Question: 23 | Mythology | ID: 18524

Question: One of them shared his name with the husband of the Oceanid Electra and father of the harpies. Another of them fell off a cliff and impaled himself on an ash-tree, and a female one killed herself to join in death her husband (*) Cyllarus. In addition to Dictys, one of them possessed a jar of wine which indirectly led to the another being struck by an arrow poisoned with Hydra blood. Battlers of the Lapiths, for 10 points, name this race of beings including Pholus, Nessus, and Chiron.

ANSWER: centaurs

Result: 2107 | FICHTE | 2009 | Round: 13_fichte09.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 18557

Question: One figure of this name is the sibling of Dag and Sigrun, and was slain at the Battle of Frekastein. Another figure of this name is the son of Halfdan the Old, but the best known figure with this name offers an arm ring, sword, and horse to Loki and is accused of killing his wife's (*) brother. That figure has runes carved on his tongue, is married to I

ANSWER: Bragi

Result: 2108 | From Here To Eternity | 2009 | Round: FHTE Finals 1 -- Final Final Final.rtf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 18597

Question: One god of these peoples has a beak and hair made of snakes and is paired with a goddess that had scissor arms. In addition to Tulchulcha, the death gods of them include Leinth and Vanth, while their blacksmith god was Sethlans. Their god of life was a son of Semla and called Fuflun, while their war god was Laran. Menrva, Uni, and Tini were a triumvirate for the gods of these people. For ten points, name these neighbors of the Romans that lived in Etruria.

ANSWER: Etruscans

Result: 2109 | From Here To Eternity | 2009 | Round: FHTE Finals 2 -- Final Final Final.rtf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 18619

Question: Like the Romans, he was renowned for plowing fields with salt, until Palamedes set his son in front of the plow. He led a raid with Diomedes and beat Ajax in a contest that led to Ajax's death during the Trojan War. A noted archer, he demonstrated his identity in one famous incident by shooting an arrow through 12 axe rings. Noted for cunning, he escaped such terrors as the Cyclopes, Circe, and Scylla and Charybidis. For ten points, name this Greek warrior and father of Telemachus, who took ten years to get home to Ithaca after originating the Trojan Horse strategy.

ANSWER: Odysseus (accept Ulysses, I guess)

Result: 2110 | From Here To Eternity | 2009 | Round: FHTE R1 Final Final Final.rtf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 18644

Question: One of this figure's sons drew an image of Cybele onto Coddinus on Mount Sipylus. One story suggests that this man tried to share ambrosia with mortals. He invited the gods to a banquet, an action which caused his sons shoulder to be replaced by ivory. That son Pelops, had his shoulder already eaten by Demeter, before being served to the gods, for which this man was punished. For ten points, identify this father of Niobe, son of Zeus, who was sentenced to be immersed in water that he could not drink, and had fruit dangle over his head.

ANSWER: Tantalus

Result: 2111 | From Here To Eternity | 2009 | Round: FHTE R2 Final Final Final.rtf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 18653

Question: This man's death may have been at the hands of King Daunus. He abandons Callirhoe, who had saved him from Lycus, while he killed Alcibie and Derimacheia. During the Trojan War, he tried to kill Aeneas but ended up wounding Athena, and he beheaded the pompous King of Thrace, Rhesus. This killer of Chromius and Echemonn worked with Odysseus to steal the Palladium and traded armor with Glaucus, now known as his namesake swap. For ten points, name this Greek warrior who shares his name with a king that had man-eating mares .

ANSWER: Diomedes

Result: 2112 | From Here To Eternity | 2009 | Round: FHTE R3 Final Final Final.rtf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 18679

Question: This daughter of the Arcadian King Lycaon originally took a vow to remain a virgin. She was a nymph of Artemis and became impregnated by Zeus. Depending on the myth, she was turned into a bear by either Artemis or Hera. Her son Arcas then attempted to slay her with a Javelin before Zeus interfered. FTP, identify this woman who along with her son was transformed into a bear and set in the night sky by Zeus as Ursa Major and Ursa minor.

ANSWER: Callisto

Result: 2113 | From Here To Eternity | 2009 | Round: FHTE R5 Final Final Final.rtf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 18708

Question: In mythology, it was said that this constellation was sent to distract Hercules during his quest to defeat the hydra. Although this constellation grabbed Hercules' toe, Hercules simply crushed him with his foot. As a result, Hera placed it in the night sky. This constellation is also has one of the nearest open clusters Praesepe or the Beehive Cluster. As of 2002, the sun appears in this constellation from July 21 to August 9.Representing the zodiac from June 24 to July 23, for ten points, identify this constellation whose name means Crab.

ANSWER: Cancer

Result: 2114 | From Here To Eternity | 2009 | Round: FHTE R6 Final Final Final.rtf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 18723

Question: This son of Nephthys is shown as having dominion over nine bows, and his daughter was the goddess of freshness and purification. In the presence of a judge and a scribe, this "Opener of the Ways" operated in the Hall of Ma'at and determined whether the jaws of Ammut or Fields of Peace would be the destination of the dead. For ten points, name this Egyptian deity who weighted hearts against a feather of truth and has a jackal-head.

ANSWER: Anubis

Result: 2115 | From Here To Eternity | 2009 | Round: FHTE R8 Final Final Final.rtf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 18757

Question: In one depiction, flames surround this god as he stands over Apasmara, and he holds a drum shaped like an hourglass and Agni. One symbol of his worship is Lingam, and he smeared ashes onto his body, called Bhasma. His hair is the source of the River Ganges, and he swallowed the world's sins causing his throat to be blue. Vamadeva and Tatpurusa are two of the five mantras that represent this god, whose consort is Parvati. Usually part of a trio that includes Brahma and Vishnu, for ten points name this Hindu destroyer.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 2116 | From Here To Eternity | 2009 | Round: FHTE R9 Final Final Final.rtf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 18783

Question: He learned nine powerful songs and eighteen runes while hanging around for nine days.

ANSWER: Odin (accept Othinn, Wodan, or Wotan)

Result: 2117 | Gaddis II | 2009 | Round: Packet 1.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 18795

Question: [GK] This figure's birth is celebrated on the first full moon of the month Chaitra, and in several images he can be seen leaning on his right knee as he pulls apart the skin near his chest to reveal other godly figures. In another story, this figure encounters the father of Ghatotkacha after that figure sets on a quest of finding lotuses with thousand petals to appease

ANSWER: Hanuman

Result: 2118 | Gaddis II | 2009 | Round: Packet 10.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 18811

Question: [EM]This figure was worshipped at a chapel called Ezida, which was built inside the temple of one of his relatives. This man took over the role as god of scribes from a figure who worked with Nanshe to settle disputes, named Nidaba. This man's consort was a queen of Borsippa, who was also known as the Lady of Hearing and Favor, named Tashmetum, and this man rode a Sirrush that he inherited from his parents. One of this figures functions was to inscribe the fate of individual humans upon clay tablets, and he could shorten or lengthen lifespans at will. With a name meaning "he who is called", this figure wears a horned cap and was born to the perpetually pregnant Sarpanit

ANSWER: Nabu

Result: 2119 | Gaddis II | 2009 | Round: Packet 2.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 18843

Question: [JM] In

ANSWER: Asclepius

Result: 2120 | Gaddis II | 2009 | Round: Packet 6.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 18895

Question: [EM] One figure by this name was transformed into a wolf that subsequently tore out Narfi's throat; that spell was cast to punish his father, Loki. The more famous character of this name was born in Vrestrsalir and had a name meaning "little warrior". In one version of his birth, this character's mother was the king of the Ruthenians and turn down the advances of the smith Rosterus. The medicine woman Vecha was actually this god's father in disguise when he raped his mother, Rindr. This god was born after consulting a vala, and didn't comb his hair or wash his hands until he was one day old. This brother of

ANSWER: Vali

Result: 2121 | Gaddis II | 2009 | Round: Packet 7.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 18903

Question: [EM] In Maori myth, after killing Matuku, Rata harvests these objects in order to create spears, and also goes to the villiage of the Ponaturi in order to retrieve those belonging to his father. In Vedic myth, Sakra asked Dadhici for some of these, which he used to create the thunderbolts that killed Vrtra. In Incan mythology, after impregnating the first woman, Pachacamac uses those belonging to his child to create plants. In Shinto, after his servant failed to retrieve a monkey's liver, Ryujin

ANSWER: bones

Result: 2122 | Gaddis II | 2009 | Round: Packet 8.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 18916

Question: [EM] One equivalent to this figure was advised by the angel Sorush to build an army, and that figure's son Siaymak was killed in single combat; that same figure gave his kingdom to his son Hushang after his death. In addition to that version from the Shahnemah, the more famous version of this figure roamed the earth as a spirit for 3000 years

ANSWER: Keyumars

Result: 2123 | Gaddis II | 2009 | Round: Packet 9.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 18928

Question: [EM] This god's daughter-in-law turned into a dragon after giving birth to his grandchildren. This god's sons were a fisherman and a hunter, and once exchanged their instruments, leading to one of them marrying a sea princess after losing a fishhook. Those children, Hoori and Hoderi, were born after this figure's wife trapped herself in a burning hut to prove her loyalty. His attendants included Koyane and Futodama, who gave birth to a line of priests,

ANSWER: Ninigi-no-mikoto

Result: 2124 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 01 HFT.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 18943

Question: This figure is identified with the god Zagreus in Orphic tradition, and he murdered the Thracian king Lycurgus after Lycurgus went after this god with an ox-goad. He turned an entire crew of pirates, with the exception of Acoetes, into dolphins after they abducted him. Also opposed by the Theban king Pentheus, he was raised by his aunt Ino after his mother mistakenly asked to see Zeus in his full glory. This god's symbol was the thyrsus, and this son of Semele was sewn into Zeus's thigh. For 10 points, name this Greek god of wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus [or Bacchus; or Liber]

Result: 2125 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 03 HFT.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 18990

Question: This place is home to the tree Glasir, which has red and gold leaves, and a boar is killed nightly to feed its inhabitants. Animals associated with this place include the rooster Gullinkambi, the stag Eikthyrnir, and the goat Heidrun, who feeds on the tree Laerad. Eight hundred soldiers can march out of this place shoulder-to-shoulder, and its rafters and roof are made of spears and shields. Located in the realm Asgard and inhabited by the Einherjar, for 10 points, name this "hall of the slain" from Norse mythology inhabited by warriors who died in combat.

ANSWER: Valhalla

Result: 2126 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 04 HFT.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 19006

Question: One of these is called Irkalla in Sumerian mythology. After visiting one of these, Izanagi created Tsukuyomi in the process of purifying himself, and the god Xolotl aids the journey to one of these places. A dark spot in the Milky Way is an entrance to one of these which is surrounded by rivers of blood, scorpions, and pus in Mayan tradition, known as Xibalba. Another of these places includes the Asphodel Meadows and the Elysian Fields and featured five rivers, like the Acheron and the Styx. For 10 points, identify these places, like Hades, where the dead go.

ANSWER: underworlds [or hells; accept equivalents]

Result: 2127 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 05 HFT.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 19040

Question: This god sent Hathor under the guise of his "eye" to punish the world, but Hathor wouldn't stop until this deity tricked her into getting drunk . He was often identified with the scarab god Khepri in the morning hours, and Isis once tricked this deity into revealing his name and giving up his power. The snake-god Mehen accompanied him on his boat, known as the "Boat of Millions," and every day he battled the demon Apophis who tried to swallow it. For 10 points, identify this god worshiped at Heliopolis, the sun god of ancient Egypt.

ANSWER: Ra [or Atum-Ra; or Ra-Horakhty, prompt early on Khepri]

Result: 2128 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 06 HFT.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 19049

Question: This figure killed Thersites, the ugliest man at Troy, for making fun of his weeping, and Polyxena was sacrificed at the tomb of this figure. He spent time on Sciros at the court of Lycomedes disguised as a woman. According to prophecy, his son by Pyrrha had to be at Troy for it to fall, and that son, Neoptolemus, would eventually kill Priam. This man lent his armor to his best friend Patroclus, whose death incited this man to kill Hector. Dipped in the river Styx as a child and destined to be "greater than his father," for 10 points, identify this figure killed by Paris, the son of Peleus and Thetis and the greatest Greek warrior at Troy.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 2129 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 06 HFT.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 19061

Question: This figure is the originator of a form of sorcery called Seid, and this figure rides the boar Hildisvini to ask the giantess Hyndla about the lineage of her protege Ottar. This character lends a feathered cloak to Thor, allowing Loki to transform into a bird in the Song of Thrymr. This figure is subsequently impersonated by Thor so that he can recover his hammer at a bridal feast. This figure received half of the dead in her hall Sessrumnir, which is located in the field Folkvangr. This daughter of the second mythological king of Sweden, Njord, was worshipped alongside her Aesir counterpart Frigg. For 10 points, name this second-most-important goddess of Norse mythology, the goddess of fertility, war, and wealth.

ANSWER: Freyja [or Freya; do not accept "Freyr"]

Result: 2130 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 07 HFT.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 19062

Question: In one story, a group of weavers working for this figure were killed when this figure's brother threw a dead horse at them and shattered their loom. This figure ruled from the High Celestial Plain and sent Ninigi to pacify the lands. The emperor Jimmu was claimed to be a direct descendent of this figure. In one legend, the sensuous dancing of Uzume lured this figure out of hiding, which had come about because of the actions of Susano'wo. For 10 points, identify this daughter of Izanagi who hid in a cave and removed light from the world, the Japanese sun goddess.

ANSWER: Amaterasu

Result: 2131 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 10 HFT.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 19140

Question: This son of Metion fathered his only child with Naucrate. After his nephew invented a saw from a fish bone, this figure pushed him from an Athenian tower. Later in his life, this man threaded a conch shell by tying a string to an ant while living at the court of Cocalus. Imprisoned for revealing his secrets to Ariadne, he escaped with his son by collecting bird's feathers over a period of time. For 10 points, identify this master inventor and creator of the labyrinth on Crete, whose son Icarus died when he flew too close to the sun.

ANSWER: Daedalus

Result: 2132 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 11 HFT.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 19145

Question: One of this figure's sons was Nabu, a good of writing, and his wife was called Zarpanit. This son of Damkina had four eyes and four ears, and since he was a childhood friend of the four winds he helped Ninurta in slaying Anzu. He was often identified with the god Asarluhi. This primary subject of the Enuma Elish had fifty names and defeated the beast Kingu. He used her blood to create mankind after stealing the Tablets of Destiny from her. For 10 points, identify this son of Ea and slayer of the primordial dragon Tiamat, the chief god of Babylon.

ANSWER: Marduk

Result: 2133 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 12 HFT.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 19171

Question: In one story involving this figure, the servant Thialfi tricked the giant Hrungnir into standing on this figure's shield. This figure's hall is called Bilskirnir, and this figure's chariot is pulled by the goats "Toothgnasher" and "Toothgrinder." His two sons by Jarnsaxa are Magni and Modi, and he had a daughter Thurd with his wife, whose golden hair was cut by Loki. This husband of Sif is killed by the Midgard Serpent at Ragnarok. He had to wear the belt Megingjord and a pair of iron gloves to wield his most famous possession. For 10 points, identify this owner of the hammer Mjollnir, the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 2134 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 14 HFT (Finals 1).doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 19205

Question: In one story, this figure was fed some roasted cereal grains to prevent him from swallowing Kubera. In another story this figure convinced his brother Kartikeya that he beat him in a race around the world, despite sitting at home the entire time. He was hit by an axe during a fight with Parashurama, and he is often depicted riding a mouse. Called the "Lord of Obstacles," he served as a scribe for Vyasa, who dictated the Mahabharata to him, and a conflict between his father and mother led to his father decapitating him. For 10 points, identify this son of Shiva and Parvati, a Hindu got of wisdom depicted with the head of an elephant.

ANSWER: Ganesha

Result: 2135 | HFT | 2009 | Round: 15 HFT (Finals 2).doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 19230

Question: One story from this people features a battle between two snake tribes, the Liru and the Kuniya, and these people believe in a sacred energy called djang. Myths from this people include ones featuring the old man Nagacork and the Wawilak sisters, who all encounter the Rainbow Serpent. Monsters called bunyips are said to inhabit bodies of water, and these people construct "song lines" as part of their oral tradition and they believe in Altjira, the god of the chaotic era known as the Dreamtime. For 10 points, identify these original inhabitants of Australia.

ANSWER: Aborigines

Result: 2136 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-01.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 19262

Question: This character killed the leader of the Rutulians in order to marry the daughter of Latinus, Livinia. This figure entered the underworld with the help of the Cumaean (kyoo-MAY-un) Sybil and a golden bough. This figure trekked to Mount Ida carrying his father and his son Ascanius. Before slaying Turnus, this man rejected the Queen of Carthage, Dido. For 10 points, name this Trojan son of Anchises and Venus, who is the namesake of an epic by Virgil about the founding of Rome.

ANSWER: Aeneas [or Aineias]

Result: 2137 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-02.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 19295

Question: One of this figure's secrets was revealed after his barber whispered into a hole in the ground. When this figure disagreed with Tmolus (tih-MOW-luss), by stating that Pan was a better musician than Apollo, this man was cursed with the ears of a donkey. This man obtained his most notable characteristic as a reward for his care of Silenus (sigh-LAY-nuss), but he rid himself of that ability by bathing in the river Patoclus (PAA-tow-cluss), after his ability killed his daughter and rendered his food inedible. For 10 points, name this Phrygian (FRIDGE-ee-uhn) king, to whom Dionysus (DYE-oh-NIGH-suss) gave the golden touch.

ANSWER: King Midas

Result: 2138 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-03.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 19322

Question: This event was accomplished by allowing the South Wind to predominate. It ended the Bronze Age and was sparked when Lycaon sacrificed a child to Zeus. Two of the survivors of this event ended up on Mount Parnassus and sought the oracle of Themis. Those two figures, who sealed themselves in a chest to survive this event, were Pyrrha and Deucalion. A prophecy instructed Deucalion to throw the bones of his mother behind him in order to repopulate the earth after, for 10 points, what event in Greek mythology, which washed away the corrupt prior civilization?

ANSWER: the flood [accept synonyms for "flood" such as " deluge"]

Result: 2139 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-04.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 19343

Question: According to legends, bees formed when this god's tears hit the desert sand. This god once punished humanity by sending the vengeful goddess Sekhmet. The cow-headed fertility goddess Hathor is called the eye of this god. At night, this god turns into a giant cat in order to slay the serpent Apophis or Apep, who attacks this god's boat in the underworld in an attempt to destroy the sun. For 10 points, name this Egyptian sun god, who was eventually combined with Amun.

ANSWER: Ra [or Re; or Amon-Ra; or Amon-Re]

Result: 2140 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-04.pdf | Question: 30 | Mythology | ID: 19371

Question: This figure and his sister killed Niobe's (nye-OH-beez) fourteen children, causing Niobe to become a puddle of tears. One woman desired by this figure was turned into a laurel tree to escape his advances. Another of his loves was killed when this god's discus accidentally hit that object of affection in the head. This lover of Daphne and Hyacinthus was also the father of the god of medicine, Asclepius. For 10 points, identify this brother of Artemis and patron of the oracle at Delphi who was the Greek god of music and light.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 2141 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-05.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 19375

Question: When a dolphin brought the body of this man's nephew, Melicertes (mel-uh-SIR-tees), to this man, he began the Isthmian games. This man angered Zeus by telling Asopus (ah-SOP-us) about Zeus' seduction of Asopus' daughter, Aegina (ee-JEEN-uh). Zeus sent Hades after this man in retaliation, but this man tricked Hades into his own handcuffs. This man was not buried properly by his wife, which allowed him to cheat death and return from the Underworld for a time. For 10 points, name this husband of Merope (meh-ROW-pee), whose trickery led to his eternal fate of rolling a boulder up a hill.

ANSWER: Sisyphus

Result: 2142 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-05.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 19392

Question: This god killed King Kartavirya (CAR-tuh-VEER-yuh) and reclaimed the Kerala region from the sea during a phase in which he wielded an axe. In the Rig Veda, this god is described crossing the entire universe in just three steps. To support Mound Mandara during the Churning of the Ocean, this god turned into a turtle. He warned Manu of a massive flood by turning into a fish. This god rides Garuda, a bird-man, and his consort is Lakshmi. His forms include Rama and Krishna, known as avatars. For 10 points, name this preserver god from Hinduism, who is part of a triad with Shiva and Brahma.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 2143 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-06.pdf | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 19427

Question: One son of Tros was transported to this location by a god disguised as an eagle, where that son, Ganymede (GAH-nuh-meed), became a cupbearer. Zeus sent a gadfly to interrupt one figure's attempt to come to this place after that figure killed the Chimera. That figure, Bellerophon (bell-AIR-uh-fawn), used Pegasus in his attempt to reach this site, and both he and Hephaestus were lamed by falls from this location. This site had a throne for each of its twelve inhabitants. For 10 points, name this location in Greek mythology, from which the gods watched over man.

ANSWER: Mount Olympus [or Olympos]

Result: 2144 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-07.pdf | Question: 24 | Mythology | ID: 19460

Question: Asclepius (as-CLEH-pee-us) gained the ability to resurrect the dead from a potion given by this goddess. This goddess gave Bellerophon (bel-AIR-oh-fon) a bridle to tame Pegasus. This figure carried a shield, made from Pallas's skin, that displayed Medusa's head. Along with Hera, this goddess was passed over in favor of Aphrodite by Paris. After her father ate her mother, Metis, she sprang fully-armored out of Zeus's head. For 10 points, identify this virgin Greek goddess of wisdom and namesake of a major Greek city.

ANSWER: Athena [or Athene]

Result: 2145 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-07.pdf | Question: 33 | Mythology | ID: 19469

Question: This figure's companion cuts down a tree in the Cedar Forest after killing Humbaba, which occurs before this figure rejects a goddess's advances, causing the goddess to send the Bull of Heaven to ravage the land. This figure walks on the ocean floor to obtain a plant which Utnapishtim told him would grant immortality. Earlier, he commands all of Uruk to mourn a wild-man, his companion Enkidu. This two-thirds god and one-thirds human figure has story that is told in twelve tablets as one of the earliest epics. For 10 points, name this hero of Mesopotamian myth.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh [or Bilgames]

Result: 2146 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-09.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 19510

Question: This god killed Fimafeng, a servant of the sea god Aegir. This god once turned into a female horse to prevent some walls from being finished on time. That resulted in him giving birth to Sleipnir, the eight-legged horse of Odin. His other offspring include the ruler of the underworld and a giant serpent that wraps around the world. This god talked Hodur into hurling a mistletoe at his brother Baldur, killing him. For 10 points, name this trickster god of Norse myth.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2147 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-09.pdf | Question: 29 | Mythology | ID: 19528

Question: This character gives a stag, a boar, and a fox to one character in exchange for six kisses. He nicks that character for keeping quiet about a magical sash, and reveals himself to be Bertilak. This character orders a man to the Green Chapel a year after their first encounter, before describing himself as being conjured by Morgan Le Fey to test the Round Table. For ten points, name this character written about by the Pearl Poet that invites anyone to decapitate him, a character paired with Sir Gawain in the title of a long poem.

ANSWER: The Green Knight [or Bertilak until mentioned]

Result: 2148 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-09.pdf | Question: 31 | Mythology | ID: 19530

Question: The Athenian painter Exekias depicted a scene in which pirates who had kidnapped this god were turned into dolphins. Pentheus was punished for refusing to acknowledge this god by being torn apart by a group of maenads ["ME-nads"], wild female followers of this god. Hestia gave up a throne on Mount Olympus to this god. This god married a Cretan princess abandoned on Naxos, Ariadne. For 10 points, name this son of Zeus and Semele (SEH-meh-lee), the Greek god of wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus [prompt on Bacchus]

Result: 2149 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-10.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 19534

Question: This figure and his mother were set afloat from Argos in a wooden chest. This man stole the one eye of the Graeae (GREYE-eye). He obtained winged sandals, a pouch, and Hades' invisibility cap. He was fathered by Zeus in the form of a shower of gold. This figure married the daughter of Cepheus (SEH-fee-us) and Cassiopeia (CAA-see-oh-PAY-uh) after rescuing that daughter from the sea monster Cetus (SAY-tus). With the aid of Athena's polished shield, this Greek hero killed the eldest of the Gorgons. For 10 points, name this husband of Andromeda and killer of Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 2150 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-10.pdf | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 19552

Question: The sea god worshipped in this myth system owned a pair of jewels that controlled the tides. This mythology believes that a red-skinned deity created thunder with a ring of drums. After vomiting up a meal, their food goddess was killed by their lunar deity. This myth system includes a storm deity that slew an eight-headed dragon and threw a flayed horse into the hall of his sister, the sun goddess, causing her to hide in a cave. For 10 points, identify this myth system whose deities, known as kami, included Raijin, Tsukuyomi, Susano-o, and Amaterasu.

ANSWER: Japanese mythology [or Shinto mythology]

Result: 2151 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-11.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 19575

Question: One blind man with this ability was unable to eat due to Zeus setting the Harpies on him. The Argonauts received information after helping that king who had used this ability too much, Phineus. Another man with this ability was crushed with his sons by two sea serpents after warning against accepting gifts from enemies. Apollo gave this ability to another person in Greek myth, with the twist that she would never be believed. For 10 points, name this ability of Laocoon (lay-AH-kuh-wahn) and Cassandra, which warned them about events in the future.

ANSWER: prophecy [or foresight; accept word forms; accept seeing the future or other exact equivalents]

Result: 2152 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-12.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 19603

Question: ?According to this myth system, the first being emerged from the mingling of ice and fire in a void called Ginnungagap (ginn-UN-guh-gap) and drank milk from the primordial cow Audhumla (odd-OOM-bluh). This belief holds that the bones of that giant, Ymir (IH-meer), were used to build the universe. In this myth system, there are nine realms in the universe, including the home of frost giants, Jotunheim (YOE-tun-highm), and the home of human beings, Midgard. For 10 points, identify this myth system that believes the universe is built around the tree Yggdrasil (IGG-druh-sill) and will be destroyed at Ragnarok.

ANSWER: Norse mythology [or Scandinavian mythology; or North Germanic mythology]

Result: 2153 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-13.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 19630

Question: This mythological character used a stool to kill his tutor Linus. This figure killed his children in a fit of madness, then atoned by serving a king who at one point hid in a jar. That king sent this character to retrieve Hippolyta's (hip-AH-lih-tuhz) girdle and kill the Stymphalian (stim-FAIL-ee-un) birds. He also freed Prometheus, tricked Atlas into holding up the world again, and fetched three golden apples from the garden of the Hesperides (hess-PER-id-eez). For 10 points, name this son of Alcmene (ALK-mee-nee) and Zeus, who completed twelve labors using his superhuman strength.

ANSWER: Herakles [or Hercules]

Result: 2154 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-13.pdf | Question: 27 | Mythology | ID: 19653

Question: This deity was once trapped in a large tree, which was incorporated into the palace of the King of Byblos. This ruler of Duat was born on the first of the five intercalary (inter-CALORIE) days that Thoth won from Khonsu. He is often depicted with either red or green skin, and he usually carries a crook and flail. His body was hacked into pieces by his villainous brother Set, and he was then avenged by his son Horus. For 10 points, name this Egyptian ruler of the underworld, whose consort was Isis.

ANSWER: Osiris [or Usiris; or Asar; or Aser; or Ausare; or Ausir; or Wesir; or Usire]

Result: 2155 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-14.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 19660

Question: This god's lover Leucothoe (LOO-cah-THO-ee) was burned alive for coupling with him. This god was the father, with the Oceanid Perse, of the Minotaur's mother Pasiphae (PASS-ih-fay). This deity's son Phaeton incurred his wrath for stealing his chariot and scorching the earth. For 10 points, name this god who drove his chariot across the sky daily, fulfilling his duty as the Greek sun god.

ANSWER: Helios [or Helius]

Result: 2156 | HSAPQ 4Q1 | 2009 | Round: 4q1-15.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 19694

Question: This god's brother Anteros was worshipped in Athens following the deaths of Meles and Timagoras. In one creation myth, his coupling with Chaos produced the birds. By one lover, he gave birth to the goddess Voluptas or Hedone. This god banished one of his lovers when her curiosity caused her to spill lamp oil on him. He is the lover of Psyche and daughter of Aphrodite. For 10 points, name this classical god of love, often depicted flying with angelic wings and wielding a magic bow and arrow.

ANSWER: Eros [or Cupid]

Result: 2157 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-01.pdf | Question: 27 | Mythology | ID: 19748

Question: One figure from the myth of these peoples was a god of thunder and lightning Illapa, who originated from the province of Collasuyu, while Apus were said to be the spirits of mountains. Their legendary founder emerged from the cave Puma Orco, after which he was instructed to build a temple to their sun god Inti. That man, Manco Capac, was sometimes also said to be the direct descendant of Viracocha, while another story says that he instead emerged from the waters of Lake Titicaca. For ten points, name this people indigenous to South America whose capital was Cuzco.

ANSWER: Inca

Result: 2158 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-02.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 19764

Question: This figure grew up on the island of Seriphos and was sent on his most famous mission by Polydectes. As an infant he was cast into the sea in a chest by Acrisius (eck-REE-zi-US), whom he later killed with a discus. He defeated a sea monster that plagued Ethiopia and thereafter married Andromeda. In his most famous adventure, he received winged sandals and the cap of Hades from the Graiae (GRY-I) after stealing their one tooth and eye. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who slayed Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 2159 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-03.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 19796

Question: This man's wife Dia was the mother of Pirithous (pie-RITH-o-US), though legends differ whether this man or Zeus was the father. This man's horses were seized after he failed to keep his promise of a gift to his wife's father Eioneus, and this man became the first mortal to murder a family member when he cast Eioneus into a pit. This man became father of the Centaurs after making love to the cloud Nephele, which this figure thought was Hera. For 10 points, name this man who was punished by Zeus by being bound to a fiery wheel for eternity.

ANSWER: Ixion

Result: 2160 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-03.pdf | Question: 23 | Mythology | ID: 19808

Question: After the death of Meleager, this figure transformed his sisters into guinea hens. This deity accidentally killed the nymph Callisto after she had been turned into a bear. This deity was caught bathing and turned her gawker, Actaeon, into a hound. With her brother, this goddess killed the children of Niobe for offending this goddess's mother, Leto. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of the moon and the hunt, the twin sister of Apollo.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 2161 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-03.pdf | Question: 27 | Mythology | ID: 19812

Question: This leader, who was born at Tintagel Castle, was raised by Ector because he was conceived out of wedlock. He left for the Isle of Avalon to heal his wounds after fighting his son Mordred at the Battle of Camlan. After his struggle against Carmelide, he married that king's daughter Guinevere despite Merlin's warnings. For 10 points, Camelot belonged to what son of Igraine and Uther Pendragon, who wielded the sword Excalibur and led the Knights of the Round Table?

ANSWER: King Arthur

Result: 2162 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-05.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 19858

Question: This figure seduced Leuce (LAY-woo-kay) and then transformed her into a white poplar tree. According to The Iliad, Heracles wounded this man at Pylos. In one myth, this man allowed Eurydice (you-RE-de-see) to leave his realm, but only on the condition that Orpheus not look back until they reached the surface. With his brothers, Poseidon and Zeus, this man defeated the Titans. His namesake realm was guarded by Cerberus and bordered by the river Styx (sticks). For 10 points, name this Greek god of the underworld.

ANSWER: Hades

Result: 2163 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-06.pdf | Question: 25 | Mythology | ID: 19906

Question: This god gave Heracles a golden goblet in which he journeyed to Erythia. This god's daughters Phaethusa and Lampetie watched his sheep on the island of Thrinacia. While staying on that island, some of Odysseus's men ate cattle sacred to this god. Among this god's daughters are Pasiphae, the wife of Minos, and the witch Circe. This god swore on the River Styx to allow his son Phaeton to drive his chariot across the sky. For 10 points, name this Greek sun god.

ANSWER: Helios

Result: 2164 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-07.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 19926

Question: One deity from this country had a cult centered in Arsinoe and caught the four sons of another god in a net after they emerged from a lotus. In addition to Sobek, another goddess from this country was tricked into drinking blood colored beer while disguised as Sekhmet. That goddess, Hathor, was sometimes depicted as a cow. An ancient culture in this country believed that the heart of the deceased was weighed against the feather of Ma'at. For 10 points, an ancient culture in what modern-day country believed that the jackal-headed Anubis invented the process of making mummies?

ANSWER: Egypt

Result: 2165 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-08.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 19960

Question: This goddess mothered Zagreus and turned Minthe into an actual mint plant. Because he lusted for this figure, Pirithous (pie-RITH-o-US) was condemned to sit on a chair with snakes coiled around his feet. Aphrodite disputed with this goddess over Adonis, who spent four months of the year with each of them. In the best known myth involving this figure, her mother neglects the duties of the earth after she is pulled into the Earth by a chariot and eats three pomegranate seeds. The Romans knew her as Proserpine. For 10 points, name this daughter of Demeter and wife of Hades.

ANSWER: Persephone [or Kore; or Cora]

Result: 2166 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-09.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 19980

Question: Idmon joined this group although he knew it would lead to his own death. This group encountered the seer Phineus, whose food was eaten by Harpies until two members of this group, Calais and Zetes, drove them off. Heracles abandoned this group to search for Hylas, and Orpheus kept this group from being enticed by the sirens. Their leader, Jason, married Medea on their voyage back from Colchis. For 10 points, name this group of Greek adventurers, who set off in their namesake ship to find the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Argonauts

Result: 2167 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-10.pdf | Question: 26 | Mythology | ID: 20033

Question: In some accounts, this man fathered Prima by Hersilia, which was the only married woman taken when this man led a group attempting to find wives among the Sabine Women. This man was attending a sacrifice when his great-uncle Numitor captured his brother. He later killed that brother after claiming to have seen twelve vultures, while his brother saw only six. For 10 points, name this legendary founder of Rome who killed his brother Remus.

ANSWER: Romulus

Result: 2168 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-10.pdf | Question: 32 | Mythology | ID: 20038

Question: One god of this civilization wore a smoking mirror in place of a leg. A hummingbird god told this civilization to build its capital city where they saw an eagle perched on a cactus and eating a snake. Another god from this civilization's pantheon sailed east on a raft after vowing to return, and was identified as a plumed serpent. Tezcatlipoca (TEZ-COT-lee-PO-kuh) and Huitzilopochtli (HWEET-zill-oh-POACHED-lee) were gods of, for 10 points, which civilization that misidentified the arrival of Hernan Cortes as the return of Quetzalcoatl (QUET-zahl-co-AH-tul)?

ANSWER: Aztecs

Result: 2169 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-11.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 20058

Question: This man was killed on an altar by Neoptolemus, and he achieved a concession by reminding another figure of the death of Peleus. This man's sons Lycaon (liu-KAY-on) and Polydorus were killed on the same day in the Trojan War. Another of his sons was abandoned on Mount Ida after a prophecy foretold the destruction of the city of which this man was king. This man ransomed the corpse of another of his sons from Achilles. For 10 points, name this father of Paris and Hector and husband of Hecuba, who was the last king of Troy.

ANSWER: Priam [or Podarces]

Result: 2170 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-12.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 20072

Question: This figure wandered over the Aleian Plain in grief after the loss of his children. This figure asked Poseidon to flood the Xanthian (ZAN-thee-an) Plain to win one battle. He was sent to Lycia with a message that he was to be killed. That message resulted from a false claim by King Proteus's wife, Stheneboea (s-TEH-NAY-bo-EE-uh), that this man had raped her. Iobates instead sent this man to kill a creature with a lion's head, goat's body, and snake's tail. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who was lamed after trying to fly Pegasus to heaven, who earlier slayed the Chimera.

ANSWER: Bellerophon

Result: 2171 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-14.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 20143

Question: Years before Paris, this figure joined the Lapith Pirathos (PEER-ah-thoos) in kidnapping a young Helen of Troy. This man killed the Crommyonian (CROW-mee-OH-nee-inn) Sow and a bandit who stretched people out on a bed. This killer of Procrustes caused the death of his father Aegeus by forgetting to change the black flags of his ships for white flags. This man abandoned Ariadne (AIR-ree-ADD-nee) after she gave him the sword and thread he needed to navigate the labyrinth. For 10 points, name this mythical King of Athens who killed the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 2172 | HSAPQ 4Q2 | 2009 | Round: 4q2-15.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 20169

Question: Although it is not Sparta, the ancestors of this city's aristocratic families were known as the Sparti. Amphion and Zethus built the walls of this city, which was named after the wife of Zethus. One queen of this city blinded herself after realizing she had married her son; that son had solved the riddle of the Sphinx to become king of the city. One son of Jocasta and Oedipus (EH-duh-pus), Polynices (PO-lee-NEE-sez), recruited six other heroes to help him regain the throne of this city from his brother Eteocles. For 10 points, name this city in Boeotia (be-O-sha) against which seven fought.

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 2173 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-sample-01.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 20217

Question: The Theogony notes that this goddess is "a nurse of the young" and that, although she is an only child, Zeus honors this goddess "above all." Although this goddess was mainly worshipped at Lagina, she is believed to be of Carian origin and possibly originally a daughter of Cybele. According to the Homeric Hymn to Demeter, this daughter of Perses and Asteria also heard Persephone's cries. Female puppies were sacrificed to this goddess, who was sometimes equated with Artemis by the Greeks and moon goddesses by the Romans. Jason made an offering of black ewe's blood and honey to this goddess to obtain her help in applying "the Promethean charm" prepared by Medea, a disciple of this goddess. For 10 points, name this goddess of witchcraft, most associated with black magic.

ANSWER: Hecate

Result: 2174 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-all.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 20221

Question: In one myth, this figure usurped Ophion and Eurynome. This figure sent the dragon Campe to guard prisoners in Tarturas. This figure's downfall began when he ingested the Omphalos stone. This man castrated his father with an adamant sickle, and the severed parts created the Erinyes, Meliae, and Gigantes. This figure ruled until he was dethroned by Zeus, Hades, and Poseidon, whom he had previously attempted to eat. For 10 points, name this husband of Rhea, the leader of the Titans who overthrew Uranus.

ANSWER: Cronus [accept Kronos; prompt on Saturnus]

Result: 2175 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-all.pdf | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 20231

Question: Because he was attacked by Achilles when he was tending his flocks, he organized the Dardanians to attack the Greeks. This man founded the town of Lavinium, named after his wife. He protected the body of Pandarus. Later, in battle, Diomedes broke this man's hip by throwing a stone, leading to his mother trying to rescue him. This ancestor of Romulus and Remus was the son of Venus and Anchises. Dido of Carthage killed herself when this man left her. For 10 points, name this Trojan survivor who was the subject of an epic by Virgil.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 2176 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-all.pdf | Question: 34 | Mythology | ID: 20253

Question: In some sources, this man had a daughter, Roma, who married Aeneas. Pisistratus accompanied this man on his journey to Sparta. This man convinced his father not to slay Medon or the minster Phemius. When he was a baby, this man was placed by Palamedes in the path of a plow. Athena sent this man to visit Nestor at Pylos. This figure appears in the Telegony where he marries Circe, who enchanted sailors led by his father, who had gone missing for twenty years. For 10 points, name this son of Penelope and Odysseus.

ANSWER: Telemachus

Result: 2177 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-all.pdf | Question: 55 | Mythology | ID: 20274

Question: This deity was nurtured in Zeus's stomach when Zeus swallowed her mother Metis. This deity engaged in a contest in which Poseidon created the first horse, and she became the namesake of a city after she offered the first olive tree. The head of the Gorgon Medusa is at the center of this goddess's shield, the Aegis. The Roman equivalent of this goddess is Minerva. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of knowledge and justice, the namesake of a Greek city-state.

ANSWER: Pallas Athena [accept Athene; accept Pallas; accept Minerva before read]

Result: 2178 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-all.pdf | Question: 64 | Mythology | ID: 20283

Question: This monarch's sister Hesione saved him from slavery as a child. His first wife Arisbe married Hyrtacus. This man's children with his second wife Hecuba included Troilus and Polites. Iris recommended this figure make a risky trip without any guards into enemy territory. Hermes helped guide him to Achilles' tent so this man could negotiate a ransom of his son's body. As this man's city is being overrun, Neoptolemus (nee-OP-tall-UH-mus) slays Polites and then this son of Laomedon (lay-AW-meh-don) in brutal fashion. For 10 points, identify this father of Hector and king of Troy in the Iliad.

ANSWER: Priam

Result: 2179 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-all.pdf | Question: 86 | Mythology | ID: 20304

Question: Apollo fired an arrow at this figure, who drank from the tainted spring of Tilphussa. His mother Chariclo pleaded on his behalf, but he only received the ability to divine birdsongs. He warns Amphitryon about Zeus's advances on Alcmene and warns Odysseus's men about the cattle of Helios. This figure angers Oedipus by telling him that he is his own downfall. This man was transformed into a woman by Hera and blinded by Athena, whom he peeked at while she was bathing. For 10 points, name this unfortunate seer from Greek mythology.

ANSWER: Tiresias

Result: 2180 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-all.pdf | Question: 92 | Mythology | ID: 20310

Question: One text of this type begins with a "euhemerized" (yoo-HEM-er-ized) prologue in which the central figures are claimed to be resettled Trojan warriors who came to be worshiped. One of these texts contains a poem in which a trickster god levies insults at the other gods. The "Poetic" or "Elder" one of these texts contains such "lays" as the Lokasenna and Voluspa. The "Prose" one was written by Icelandic statesman Snorri Sturluson. Both of these texts outline a system of myth that contains such figures as Baldur, Loki, and Odin. For 10 points, give the general name for these primary-source texts for Norse mythology.

ANSWER: the Eddas

Result: 2181 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-rmp.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 20426

Question: This god's forms include the white, six-armed peacock rider who kills the demon Sindu, and Dhumraketu, who will cleanse the world during the Kali Yuga. Three of this god's four hands hold an axe, a whip, and a lotus. He is depicted riding a mouse or a rat, and this deity is often called the "remover of obstacles." This god is the oldest son of Parvati and Shiva, who chopped off his original head. He only has one tusk and is often shown holding the broken one. For 10 points, name this elephant-headed god from Hinduism.

ANSWER: Ganesha

Result: 2182 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-rmp.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 20427

Question: Tales from this people include a symbolic marriage with the earth and their creation story orders animals, clay, and wood as coming before mankind. Their death deities include Hunhau (wan-WAH). Their underworld, called Xibalba (shee-BALL-bah), was visited by two twins important to their mythology. Those twins had earlier slain the deity Seven Macaw. That tale of Hunaphu (WAN-ah-pwa) and Xbalanque (SHEE-BA-lan-KAY) appears, among other sources, in the Popol Vuh. Centered around Copan and Tikal, for 10 points, name this Mesoamerican culture that was responsible for the construction of Chichen Itza.

ANSWER: the Mayans

Result: 2183 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-rmp.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 20428

Question: This mythical figure used the story of "turning an old ram into a young ram" in order to convince Pelias's daughters to kill Pelias. She also killed the bronze giant Talos by driving him insane. At one point, this character was taken to her aunt, Circe (SEER-cee), to receive cleansing after she chopped her brother into pieces. She also killed Glauce (GLAU-see) and her own children to enact revenge upon her former husband, who was protected from some fire-breathing oxen and a sleepless dragon with her help. For 10 points, name this sorceress who aided Jason.

ANSWER: Medea

Result: 2184 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-rmp.pdf | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 20431

Question: One antagonist of this character never sleeps and is wearing only one of his seven armors when he is defeated. This figure foresaw the arrival of his rival when he dreamt of being attracted to an immobile star and an axe, and the goddess Aruru created that rival out of clay. He defeats the monstrous defender of Cedar Forest, Humbaba. On his quest to find immortality, this figure meets one of the only two survivors of the Great Flood, Utnapishtim. He fights with Enkidu in the second tablet of Enuma Elish. For 10 points, what king of Uruk is the hero of the Sumerian myth?

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 2185 | HSAPQ NASAT Tryout Set | 2009 | Round: nasat-tryout-rmp.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 20436

Question: One of this man's brothers, who rode around in a bronze chariot imitating Zeus, was Salmoneus (SAL-moh-NAY-uss). He marked the hooves of his cattle to prove that Autolycus was stealing from him. He earned Zeus's wrath for telling Asopus of Aegina's abduction. This son of Enarete (EE-nuh-REE-tay) and Aeolus (eye-OH-luss) claimed that his wife Merope (muh-ROH-pee) did not perform proper funeral rites. He made that claim in order to convince Persephone to allow him to return to life, and he earlier tricked Death into chaining himself. For 10 points, name the tragic Greek who was condemned to eternally roll a boulder up a hill.

ANSWER: Sisyphus

Result: 2186 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-01.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 20501

Question: This mythological figure was also known as Cynthia for her birth on a namesake mountain in Delos. One of her attendants conceived Arcas and was changed into a bear, and she spared Agamemnon from having to sacrifice her daughter after he killed one of her pets. In addition to transforming (*) Callisto and sparing Iphigenia, this goddess was symbolized by the bow and arrow, the deer, and the moon. For 10 points, name this Greek virgin goddess of the hunt, the twin sister of Apollo and known as Diana in Rome.

ANSWER: Artemis [or Potnia Theron; or Aeginea; or Phoebe; do not accept "Diana"]

Result: 2187 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-02.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 20514

Question: This figure's uncle was warned to beware a man with only one sandal, which made Pelias surrender out of fear when this man appeared to claim the throne of Iolcus. This man's wife convinced the daughters of Pelias to cut up their father, and that wife (*) poisoned this hero's lover Glauce (GLAO-kay). This man sowed dragon's teeth at the command of king Aeetes, and his crew was saved from death by his wife Medea. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who was head of the Argonauts as part of his quest for the Golden Fleece.

ANSWER: Jason

Result: 2188 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-03.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 20544

Question: This figure once disguised her lover Ottar as a boar, and she owns a falcon skin that allows the wearer to transform into a bird. Her mother Skaoi is the goddess of winter and archery. The giant Thrym refused to return Mjolnir unless he was allowed to marry this figure, who rides in a chariot drawn by (*) cats. She receives half of all slain warriors in her hall, Folkvangr, and Loki once stole her necklace Brisingamen. For 10 points, identify this Norse goddess of love and beauty.

ANSWER: Freya

Result: 2189 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-04.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 20562

Question: Isis once poisoned this god in order to blackmail him into divulging his true name. Another story says that Thoth had to make 1,077 pleas in order to convince the goddess representing his eye to return home. Mehen and Set helped defend this god when he traveled on the barque ("BARK") Mandjet, during which time he was attacked by the (*) serpent Apep. He sent Hathor to Earth in the form of Sekhmet to punish man, and he was often syncretized with Amun. For 10 points, identify this Egyptian god of the sun.

ANSWER: Ra [or Re; or Re-Horakhty; or Amun-Re]

Result: 2190 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-05.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 20590

Question: One prophecy said that this event would end when a man returned from exile on Lemnos. During this event, Pandarus broke a truce, and one participant fell in love with the Amazon queen Penethesilea (PEN-thess-eh-LAY-uh). (*) Philoctetes (fih-LOK-teh-teez) used the bow of Heracles to fulfill the conditions for ending this event, which drew to a close after Laocoon (lay-AH-co-ahn) was attacked by snakes for warning against Greeks bearing gifts. For 10 points, name this mythical conflict over the abduction of Helen, fought between Greeks and a certain city.

ANSWER: the Trojan War

Result: 2191 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-06.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 20611

Question: One king of this city, who was a son of Hephaestus, was wrapped in a snake and put into a chest, leading to Pandrosus being bitten. That legend echoes one about this city's first king, a half-snake named Cecrops. Another king of this city, who threw himself into the (*) sea upon seeing a ship with black sails, was Aegeus. The planting of an olive tree persuaded this city's founders not to dedicate it to Poseidon. For 10 points, name this Greek city which was mythically named for its devotion to a virginal goddess of war, who was worshipped at the Parthenon.

ANSWER: Athens

Result: 2192 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-07.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 20626

Question: Some of this deity's servants were slain when the corpse of a skinned horse was thrown at them. This deity is worshipped at a shrine which is torn down and rebuilt every twenty years. That shrine contains the Sacred Mirror, which was an object used to lure this figure out of a cave she had been hiding in. This figure created rice fields and taught people how to cultivate silk. This goddess went into hiding because of the actions of her brother, the storm god Susano'o. For 10 points, name this sun goddess from (*) Japanese mythology.

ANSWER: Amaterasu Omikami [award 15 points even after "for 10 points" has been read if it's within the

Result: 2193 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-08.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 20644

Question: After drinking the blood of one of these creatures, Sigurd gains the ability to understand the language of birds in the Volsung Saga. One of these animals was named Ladon and protected the golden apples of the Hesperides. This creature was called "lung" in China, and a Babylonian one killed by (*) Marduk was named Tiamat. Fafnir turned himself into one of these animals before being killed for his hoarded gold. For 10 points, name this mythological animal that was often represented as a flying, fire breathing lizard.

ANSWER: dragons

Result: 2194 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-09.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 20667

Question: A fire-breathing one was tamed by Jason in his pursuit for the Golden Fleece. Phaethusa and Lampetia watched over these animals on the island of Thrinacia for their father Helios. Several of them were guarded by Eurytion and the two-headed Orthrus, who were defeated by Heracles. (*) Geryon owned several of these animals, more of which were stolen by Hermes the very night he was born. Poseidon sent one of these animals to mate with Pasiphae in a union that produced the Minotaur. For 10 points, what are these bovine animals tended to in Greek myth by Apollo?

ANSWER: cattle [or bulls; or cows]

Result: 2195 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-10.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 20685

Question: This man captured the city of Lyrnessos, and he disguised himself as a girl in the court of Lycomedes. He had a son by Deidameia named Pyrrhus, and he was enraged when his prize (*) Briseis was taken from him. Angered by the death of his friend Patroclus, this figure refused funeral rights to and dragged Hector around the gates of Troy after killing him. This figure was the son of Peleus and Thetis. For 10 points, name this Greek hero of The Iliad whose heel was rendered vulnerable after not being dipped in the River Styx.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 2196 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-12.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 20733

Question: This man went to Hyperborea to catch an animal sacred to Artemis. Iolaus (EYE-oh-lay-us) held the heads of one creature that this man slew, and he wore another as a (*) pelt after clubbing it to death. This slayer of the Nemean Lion and the Hydra diverted a river to clean the stables of King Augeus and fed Diomedes to his own flesh-eating mares. As penance for killing his wife and sons in a rage, this figure performed twelve tasks. For 10 points, name this Greek hero, the paragon of masculinity.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 2197 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-14.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 20774

Question: This figure was born after his father assumed the guide of Gorlois, infiltrated Tintagel Castle, and impregnated Ygraine. This figure died of wounds inflicted at the Battle of Camlann, and was then brought to the island of (*) Avalon. This son of Uther Pendragon was fatally betrayed by Mordred. He acquired his sword from the Lady of the Lake. For 10 points, name this husband of Guinivere, who ruled the knights of the Round Table at Camelot.

ANSWER: King Arthur

Result: 2198 | HSAPQ Tournament 10 | 2009 | Round: tourn10-15.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 20796

Question: In one myth, this figure tries to kill a giant using a large stick, but instead has to carve his way out of the giant's belly. In multiple myths, this figure's son is the first death. This figure is sometimes known as the "Old Man," and in some myths created man by kicking a ball of mud. Several stories about this figure are likewise attributed to (*) Raven. For 10 points, name this trickster figure of several Native American mythological systems.

ANSWER: Coyote

Result: 2199 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-01.pdf | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 20818

Question: A scar on this man's thigh from a wound suffered during a boar hunt leads his servant and childhood nurse Euryclea (you-RIH-klee-uh) to recognize him. Sacrifices of the sacred cattle of Helios led to a disaster, of which this man was the only survivor. He pretended to be named (*) "no man" in order to blind the Cyclops Polyphemus (pall-uh-FEE-mus). This man's dog Argos died upon seeing him return from Troy after ten years to defeat his wife Penelope's suitors. For 10 points, name this king of Ithaca and hero of a namesake epic.

ANSWER: Odysseus [or Ulysses; or Ulixes]

Result: 2200 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-01.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 20825

Question: This figure tricked Alviss out of marrying his daughter by questioning him until he turned into stone. This son of the giantess Jord rides in a chariot drawn by a pair of goats, whom he eats and resurrects when he's hungry. This husband of (*) Sif is fated to die after taking nine steps while battling the serpent Jormungandr (YOUR-mun-gand-er) at Ragnarok. This god wields the hammer Mjollnir (muh-YOHL-neer), which shoots lightning bolts. For 10 points, name this red haired son of Odin, the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [or Donner or Donar; or Thunaraz]

Result: 2201 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-02.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 20844

Question: The Palermo stone is an early record of the existence of this deity, whose popularity skyrocketed after the Ennead and Ogdoad merged. This deity's wife traveled to Byblos to find his body after his brother locked him in a coffin and threw it into the river. A fish devoured one of his organs after this figure's outraged brother (*) chopped and dismembered him into fourteen pieces. Thirteen of those pieces were recovered; the fourteenth was replaced by a golden penis by his wife, Isis. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of the dead and father of Horus.

ANSWER: Osiris [or Usiris; or Asar; or Aser; or Ausar; or Ausar; or Wesir; or Usir; or Usire; or Ausare

Result: 2202 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-04.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 20868

Question: In the myths of the Pacific Northwest, one of these animals creates the world by dropping a stone in the ocean and by hurting Seagull until he drops a box. In Celtic myth, Morrigan takes the form of one of these birds to scout her battlefields. Two of these named (*) "thought" and "memory" fly out from Hlidskjalf (HLID-skee-yalf) to give a one-eyed god news about Midgard. Huginn (HOO-gin) and Muninn (MOO-nin) are two of these animals, the two servants of Odin. For 10 points, name these black birds, also known as corvids, that are typically associated with ill luck.

ANSWER: ravens [or crows; or corvids prior to mention]

Result: 2203 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-05.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 20896

Question: The personification of waters in this kingdom's mythology, Apsu (OP-soo), was defeated and used as a foundation for a temple by Ea (EY-uh) or Enki. The Tablet of Destinies was affixed to Kingu, the son of a monster in this mythology. That monster's defeat was told in the (*) Enuma Elish (EH-noo-muh eh-LEESH), the creation myth of this kingdom, which ends in Tiamat's (TEE-uh-motz) defeat by Marduk (MAR-dook), for whom a ziggurat was built in this kingdom's capital. The Ishtar Gate is in, for 10 points, what Mesopotamian city once the center of an empire ruled by the lawmaker Hammurabi?

ANSWER: Babylon [accept word forms; accept Sumeria until "Enuma Elish"]

Result: 2204 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-05.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 20904

Question: According to legend, this man brought Greece the alphabet. When Illyria was destroyed, Zeus turned this figure and Harmonia into black serpents and sent them to the Elysian Fields. This man was ordered by the oracle at Delphi to cease his quest to find his sister (*) Europa and to settle at the spot where a cow lay down. This man created a race of armed men known as Spartoi after planting dragon's teeth. For 10 points, name this founder of Thebes.

ANSWER: Cadmus

Result: 2205 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-06.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 20917

Question: He was killed in Sicily when the daughters of Cocalus (coh-CAH-lus) placed him in a boiling bath. This mythical figure is one of the judges of the underworld along with his brother (*) Rhadamanthys (RAD-uh-MAN-this), and Aeacus (eye-EE-kus). His wife placed herself in a hollow wooden cow devised by Daedalus to fulfill her Poseidon-inflicted lust for the bull. For 10 points, what king of Crete demanded seven Athenian youths and seven maidens to feed the Minotaur?

ANSWER: Minos

Result: 2206 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-07.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 20949

Question: While bathing on Cithaeron (kith-AY-er-on), this goddess turned a spying hunter into a stag, who was then devoured by his own hounds. She turned the mother of Arcas into a bear and killed a hunter who tried to seduce her follower Opis. One woman insulted this goddess's mother by boasting of her own (*) fourteen children. This slayer of Actaeon (ACK-tay-on) and of Niobe's (nye-OH-beez) children was born on a floating island to Leto along with her twin brother. For 10 points, name this daughter of Zeus and sister of Apollo who was the Greek goddess of fertility and the hunt.

ANSWER: Artemis [accept Diana before "Greek" is read]

Result: 2207 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-08.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 20968

Question: Ixion copulated with a cloud shaped like this goddess to birth the race of centaurs. To prevent a certain birth, this figure ordered Alcmene's (alk-MEN-eez) legs to be tied up. She sent two snakes that one child easily killed and sent the hundred-eyed giant (*) Argus to watch Io. This frequently jealous goddess was the protector of women and marriages. For 10 points, name this mother of Hebe (HEE-bee) and Ares (AAR-eez), who was the wife of Zeus and the queen of the Greek gods.

ANSWER: Hera [accept Juno before "Ares" is read]

Result: 2208 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-09.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 20980

Question: This god threw himself onto a funeral pyre and then became the planet Venus. He mixed the bones from the previous four worlds with his own blood to create humanity. The twin brother of this god is a dog-faced lightning deity named (*) Xolotl (SHO-lot-el). This god was once exiled by the "smoking mirror" Tezcatlipoca (TEZ-kat-lee-poe-kah). Because this god had light skin and a light beard, believers made the grave mistake of confusing this feathered serpent with Hernan Cortes (cor-TEZ). For 10 points, name this chief deity of the Aztecs.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl (ket-ZAL-co-ahh-tl)

Result: 2209 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-10.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 20999

Question: This woman was given flowers by the Horae (HOR-eye), gold necklaces by the Charities, and the ability to weave and sew by Athena. Her only child was a survivor of the catastrophic Flood named Pyrrha (PEER-uh). This wife of (*) Epimetheus committed a notorious action that was conceived by Zeus as a punishment to mankind for accepting fire from Prometheus. That action left hope, even as the spirits of evil filled the world. For 10 points, identify this woman in Greek mythology, who removed the lid of a namesake "box."

ANSWER: Pandora

Result: 2210 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-10.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 21010

Question: In Hindu myth, the fish Matsya (MAHT-sha) protected Manu from one of these events. In Norse myth, Bergelmir (BUR-gul-meer) and his wife founded Jotunheim (YO-tun-hime) after surviving one of these. In Babylonian myth, the gods decided to create one of these to punish humanity for being too loud, but Ea warned (*) Utnapishtim (OOT-nuh-PISH-tim) about it. Archaeologists suggest that all of these myths may have been based on a real event that occurred around 5500 BCE. For 10 points, identify this kind of catastrophe, that was also survived by Noah.

ANSWER: great floods [or great deluges]

Result: 2211 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-12.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 21043

Question: This goddess punished the stingy Alcinoe (al-SEE-know), who ultimately leapt into the sea. Punishment for watching this goddess bathe may have been the cause of Tiresias's (tye-REE-see-us) blindness. This goddess won a contest when her (*) olive tree was deemed more useful than Poseidon's salty well. This daughter of Metis turned Arachne into a spider after losing a weaving contest. She was born when Hephaestus split Zeus's head open. For 10 points, name this Greek goddess of wisdom and war.

ANSWER: Athena [or Minerva; or Pallas]

Result: 2212 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-13.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 21063

Question: One of these items was discovered in the body of Orochi by Susanoo (soo-sa-NO-wo) in Japanese mythology. Another was forged by Weyland (VIE-lond) and used by Sigurd to defeat Fafnir. Those items were called, respectively, Kusanagi (KOO-suh-NAH-gee) and Gram. Another of these items bears the inscriptions "take me up" and "cast me away" and has its accessory discarded by (*) Morgan le Fay. Another one was pulled from a stone by the son of Uther Pendragon. The Lady of the Lake gave Arthur, for 10 points, what kind of weapon exemplified by Excalibur?

ANSWER: swords

Result: 2213 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-14.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 21082

Question: After kidnapping Helen, this man accompanied his friend on an abortive kidnapping attempt in the underworld, which ended with him being stuck to a chair until he was rescued by Heracles. This companion of (*) Pirithous (PEER-uh-thoos) left one lover on Naxos after she helped him navigate a certain area with a ball of string. This hero killed the Crommyonian (CRAH-mee-oh-nee-un) sow and married the Amazon Hippolyta, making her the queen of Athens. For 10 points, name this hero who navigated the labyrinth and killed the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 2214 | HSAPQ Tournament 11 | 2009 | Round: tourn11-15.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 21106

Question: Two members of a group led by this man rescued King Phineus (fin-AY-us) in Asia from some bothersome harpies. Those men, Zetes (ZEE-teez) and Calais (cah-LAY-iss), were children of the North Wind. Other members of that group led by this man included Odysseus's grandfather Autolycus (AW-toe-LYE-kus), Nestor, and (*) Meleager (MEL-ee-EY-ger). With the help of a potion brewed by the daughter of King Aeetes (eye-EE-teez), this hero was able to elude a dragon and secure the Golden Fleece. For 10 points, name this onetime husband of Medea and leader of the Argonauts.

ANSWER: Jason

Result: 2215 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-05.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 21209

Question: This figure tricked Lycurgus into thinking his son was an ivy plant and killing him. After being kidnapped by a group of sailors, this deity transformed all but Acoetes into dolphins. This god drove Pentheus mad and caused him to be ripped apart by the (*) Maenads, and as a reward for caring for Silenus, this god granted Midas the golden touch. This god was reborn from Zeus' thigh after his mother was burnt to death after seeing Zeus in his full glory. For 10 points, name this son of Semele, the Greek god of agriculture, wine, and revelry.

ANSWER: Dionysus [or Bacchus]

Result: 2216 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-05.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 21214

Question: After the Churning of the Ocean of Milk, this figure stole amrita for the adityas in the form of a beautiful woman. As a dwarf this figure requested three levels of land to live on in order to defeat Bali, and he once defended Vedas against Haygriva in the form of a fish. This god, who appeared as Mohini, (*) Vamana and Matsya, also appeared as a blue skinned king who rescued Sita from Ravana and served as an advisor and charioteer to Arjuna. For 10 points, name this Indian sustainer god and member of the trimurti, who descended to earth in nine avatars, including Rama and Krishna.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 2217 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-06.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 21221

Question: During the new moon, this figure was considered to be blind and was known as Mekhenty-er-irty. The Greeks adapted him into the god of silence Harpocrates. His severed hands were recovered by Sobek, who also once saved this god's four sons, who guarded the canopic jars. He once tricked his most famous rival into using a stone boat in a race and into eating this god's (*) semen, which he had hidden in lettuce. This sky god came to power by avenging the death of his father and defeating his uncle Set. For 10 points, name this falcon-headed Egyptian god, the son of Isis and Osiris.

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 2218 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-07.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 21256

Question: This figure's son by the giantess Rindr was born with the sole purpose of killing another of his sons. His hall Valaskjalf contains his throne Hlidskjalf, and he receives half of the einherjar. With his brothers Vili and Ve, this god created Ask and Embla, and he later hung upside down impaled with his own (*) spear to learn the secrets of the runes. He is served by the ravens Hugin and Munin and his possessions include the spear Gungnir and the eight-legged horse Sleipnir. With his wife Frigg, he fathered Hodr and Baldur. For 10 points, name this chief god of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin [or Oden; or Wotanaz; or Wodin; or Woden]

Result: 2219 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-08.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 21261

Question: This figure once disguised himself as Enipeus to father Pelias and Neleus on Tyro, and some stories claim that this figure was raised on Rhodes by the Telchines. After raping a Lapith woman, this deity turned her into the male hero Caeneus, and he also fathered Chrysaor and Pegasus with Medusa. With Apollo, this god built walls for King (*) Laomedon of Troy, and he lost the contest for the patronage of Athens to Athena. With Amphitrite, he fathered the conch-horn-wielding fish-man Triton. For 10 points, name this Greek god of earthquakes and the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 2220 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-08.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 21273

Question: This figure is thought to have fathered Sobek with Neith. He referred to as the "Lord of the Northern Sky" in the Book of the Dead. In order to protect Ra during his journey through the underworld, this deity battled the serpent Apep every night. This god's wife (*) Nepthys cheated on him and gave birth to Anubis. This god was tricked into giving the throne of united Egypt to his brother's son after he stole Horus's eye. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god of evil and chaos who chopped up and killed his brother Osiris.

ANSWER: Set [or Seth or Seteh or Sutekh]

Result: 2221 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-10.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 21309

Question: This figure's son won Hippodomia after defeating Oenomaus in a chariot race, and his daughter was turned into a rock on Mount Sipylus, where she is said to weep when snow melts above it. Pindar's first Olympian ode states that this figure stole nectar and ambrosia from heaven and gave it to the (*) mortals, and another legend states that he killed his son and fed him to the gods. For 10 points, name this father of Niobe and Pelops who was punished by having water and fruit placed just beyond his grasp.

ANSWER: Tantalus

Result: 2222 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-11.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 21330

Question: After this god's wife built a child out of the mud, he sliced that child's head off. This figure voluntarily drank the Halahala poison, and he fathered a war god named Skanda. This deity was often depicted with a blue throat on the dwarf Apasmara holding an hourglass. This god, whose dancing form is known as Nataraja, was forced to put the head of an (*) elephant on Ganesh. This husband of Parvati is most often shown as a four-armed cosmic dancer. For 10 points, name this Hindu god of destruction, a member of the Trimurti along with Brahma and Vishnu.

ANSWER: Shiva [or Siva or Siwa]

Result: 2223 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-12.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 21353

Question: This figure guided Nausicca to Odysseus after appearing to her in a dream, and this deity raised Erichthonuis after almost being raped by Hephaestus. This deity helped Herakles retrieve Cerberos from the underworld. After being defeated in a weaving contest, this goddess turned (*) Arachne into a spider. This goddess was often depicted with an owl, and her most famous temple was the Parthenon. For 10 points, name this deity who sprung fully-grown and armored out of Zeus's head. the Greek goddess of wisdom.

ANSWER: Pallas Athena [or Pallas Athene or Athena Parthenos]

Result: 2224 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-13.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 21375

Question: This mythology believes that the Milky Way is a path used by migrating birds. In this mythology, the dead cross nine seas and a river to reach Manala, Pohjola, or Tuonela. This mythology believes that the world was formed by Ilmatar, and that a type of harp called the kantele was created by Ilmatar's son (*) Vainamoinen (VIE-nuh-MOI-nen). Vainamoinen appears with Lemminkainen (LEM-in-KAI-nen) and the sampo creator Ilmarinen in the definitive collection of this mythology, the Kalevala. For 10 points, name this native myth system of eastern Scandinavia.

ANSWER: Finnish mythology [accept obvious equivalents]

Result: 2225 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-13.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 21381

Question: After ripping apart Silus with two trees, this figure raped his daughter Peregrine and fathered Melanippus. Along with the Lapith prince Pirithous, he kidnapped a young Helen. This man also slayed the enormous Crommyonian sow and killed the people-stretching bandit (*) Procrustes. His father Aegeus died when this hero forgot to change his ship's sails from black to white after Ariadne used a long piece of string to help him out of the labyrinth. For 10 points, name this mythological founder of Athens and slayer of the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 2226 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-14.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 21398

Question: According to one account, this figure was killed by Herakles for stealing Geryon's oxen; another account claims she aroused the wrath of Amphitrite. In a third account, this lover of Glaucus was transformed out of jealousy by Circe. This woman was turned into a (*) creature with twelve feet, the body of a dog, and six heads, each of which devoured a sailor as a ship passed through the Strait of Messina. For 10 points, name this sea monster located directly across from the whirlpool Charybdis.

ANSWER: Scylla

Result: 2227 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-14.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 21400

Question: As a boy, this figure prophecied that a fortress kept collapsing because it was built over a red dragon fighting a white dragon. This figure was imprisoned forever after falling in love with Nimue, and prophecized the Dolorous Stroke. This figure designed the (*) Round Table, and crowned the son of Uther Pendragon after that son pulled a sword from a stone. For 10 points, name this mythological wizard who advised King Arthur.

ANSWER: Merlin

Result: 2228 | HSAPQ Tournament 8 | 2009 | Round: tourn8-15.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 21423

Question: One of this god's sons pursued the nymph Syrinx, causing her to turn into reed pipes. This god killed the giant Argos in order to allow Zeus to abduct Io, and gave the herb moly to Odysseus to help him defeat Circe. This father of Priapus and (*) Pan was the god of trade and thieves, and traveled on a pair of winged sandals. For 10 points, name this messenger of the Greek gods, whose Roman equivalent was Mercury.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 2229 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-02.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 21460

Question: This people believed in a celestial realm called the Hanan Paca and a lower realm called the Ukhu Paca, while humans resided in the middle realm, Cay Paca. Sacred sites known as Huacas (WAH-kuz) were used in rituals by this culture. They believed that their civilization was founded by Mama Ocllo and Manco Capac, a descendent, through Inti, of their creator deity, (*) Viracocha. A great flood around the shores of Lake Titicata also features in the myths of, for 10 points, what South American civilization whose language, Quechua, was spoken in their capital of Cuzco?

ANSWER: Incans [or Incas]

Result: 2230 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-02.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 21468

Question: This man was killed with a lance tipped with the venom of a stingray. After his death, his son by an extramarital affair, Telegonus, married his wife, and his son by his wife married the mother of Telegonus. His affair that produced Telegonus occurred on Aeaea, where Hermes gave him moly to allow him to resist (*) Circe's magic. Along with his son Telemachus, he slew over one hundred suitors for his wife Penelope. For 10 points, name this king of Ithaca whose journey back from the Trojan War was told by Homer.

ANSWER: Odysseus [or Ulysses]

Result: 2231 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-05.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 21510

Question: One myth attached to this man says he was loved by a princess named Scylla, who ended up drowning and being turned into a seabird. This man died at Sicily, where a special invention dumped boiling water into his bath, scalding him to death. After his athletic son Androgeos was killed, this man demanded a cruel burden from Athens, which was eventually stopped by (*) Theseus. He was ultimately killed by Daedalus, who built the Labyrinth for him. For 10 points, name this legendary king of Crete, whose name inspired that of the monster produced by his wife's mating with a bull, the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Minos

Result: 2232 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-06.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 21532

Question: This group did battle with the Gorgons on the island of Atlantis under the leadership of Myrine (my-REE-nay), but were unable to finish them off. Another leader of this group, Penthesilea (PEN-theh-sih-LAY-uh), was killed by Achilles during the Trojan War. Another of their leaders was kidnapped by (*) Theseus, leading to a war between this group and Athens. A different leader of this group willingly gave her girdle to Heracles. For 10 points, name this group of warrior women whose name came from their tradition of burning off their right breast.

ANSWER: Amazons

Result: 2233 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-07.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 21562

Question: This figure turned Lamia into a monster and killed Lamia's children. Tiresias became a priest of this deity after turning into a woman. A cloud in the shape of this figure gave birth to the centaurs after being impregnated by Ixion. This goddess sent two serpents to kill the infant (*) Heracles, and she later forced Heracles to carry out the twelve labors for Eurystheus (yur-ISS-thee-us). This firmly anti-Trojan goddess repeatedly tried to block Aeneas's mission. For 10 points, name this goddess who also antagonized Io and Semele when they dallied with Zeus, her husband.

ANSWER: Hera [or Juno]

Result: 2234 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-09.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 21613

Question: This figure's mother was turned into a tree that produced the Balm of Gilead. This figure was conceived after Cinyras was seduced by his daughter Myrrha. Drops of this man's blood turned into anemone (ah-NEH-mow-nee). Aphrodite killed Orpheus to spite Calliope (cuh-LIE-oh-pee) for giving this man to (*) Persephone (per-SEF-uh-nee) for half of the year. This figure's beauty was so prized that he was hidden in a chest until his violent death. For 10 points, name this beautiful mortal who was killed by a boar sent by a jealous Ares.

ANSWER: Adonis

Result: 2235 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-10.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 21632

Question: This wife of Asterius possessed a bronze robot that hurled stones at unwanted strangers, and a hound that always caught whatever he was hunting. Those creatures were Talos and Laelaps. Two of this woman's sons serve alongside Aeacus (eye-EEK-us) as judges of the dead. While searching for this woman, her brother (*) Cadmus founded Thebes. After being carried off to Crete, this Phoenician princess bore Sarpedon, Rhadamanthys (rad-uh-MAN-thus), and Minos. For 10 points, name this woman who was abducted by Zeus in the form of a white bull.

ANSWER: Europa

Result: 2236 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-11.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 21656

Question: During a journey taken by this man, he has five bad dreams, each of with is interpreted by a friend as a good omen. In addition to taking that journey to the Cedar Forest, where he helps kill the demonic guardian (*) Humbaba, this hero rejects the advances of Ishtar. That action which causes the death of his wild friend, Enkidu. This two-thirds-god, one-third-man figure fails to gain immortality despite the aid of Utnapishtim. For 10 points, name this king of Uruk, the subject of a Sumerian epic that is one of the oldest works of narrative literature.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh [or Bilgames]

Result: 2237 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-12.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 21667

Question: This deity trips a figure named Lit and kicks him into a pyre. This deity, assisted by some items given by Grid, defeats Geirrod, but fails to wrestle Eli, who is really Old Age. This deity cannot pick up the cat of (*) Utgard-Loki, but does make Thialfi into his apprentice. This figure bears the sons Magni and Modi, kills Hrungnir (RUNG-neer) over his wife Sif, and goes fishing with Hymir (IM-eer), who cuts his line before he can rope in the Midgard Serpent. He is killed by that serpent at Ragnarok despite being able to wield Mjollnir (MYOLL-neer). For 10 points, name this Norse god of thunder and son of Odin.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 2238 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-13.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 21700

Question: On the battlefield of Kurukshetra (KOO-rook-SHEH-truh), Bhishma (BEECE-muh) recites the thousand names for this deity. A conch, lotus, and mace are held by this deity, who assumed the form of a fish, Maitsya, and appeared to Manu. One form of this deity will appear at the end of the Kali Yuga and is known as Kalki, but better known (*) forms include a deity who frolics with some Gopis and councils Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. In addition to assuming the forms of Krishna and Rama, this deity forms the trimurti with Brahma and Shiva. For 10 points, name this preserver of Hindu mythology.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 2239 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-14.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 21713

Question: In one story, this figure attempts to marry one god's daughter by revealing her secret name while playing the drums, but he cannot be understood. In another story, this figure captures a leopard, a python, and some hornets using a pit, a bamboo pole, and a (*) gourd, which leads to this figure becoming the owner of all stories. This figure often interacts with his mother, Asase Yaa (ah-SAH-say YAH), and his father, Nyame (nee-AH-may). For 10 points each, name this West African trickster god, whose form is that of a spider.

ANSWER: Kwaku Anansi

Result: 2240 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-14.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 21718

Question: One mythical figure with responsibility for this activity is the Hindu consort of Shiva named Durga. The Greek deity of this type was trapped in a jar by the Aloadai (al-OH-uh-dye) twins. That god of this type was also caught in a metallic web built by (*) Hephaestus to catch him sleeping with Aphrodite. The Greek god of this domain was the owner of the dogs Phobos and Deimos. For 10 points, name this activity of which Ares was the patron.

ANSWER: warrior gods

Result: 2241 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-15.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 21745

Question: Pausanius claims that the original group of these figures had three members, including Aoide (ay-OH-id-ay). Three of them, Nete (NEE-tee), Mese (MAY-see), and Hypate (HIP-uh-tay), were the only three worshiped at Delphi. The footfalls of Pegasus were said to have created their fountain Hippocrene (hip-AH-cruh-nee), which was located on a mountain sacred to them, Helicon. They also spent time at Mount (*) Parnassus. Their ranks included Euterpe (YOU-ter-pay) and Clio, whose respective domains were music and history. For 10 points, name these Greek goddesses who inspired artistic creation.

ANSWER: the Muses

Result: 2242 | HSAPQ Tournament 9 | 2009 | Round: tourn9-15.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 21747

Question: He fathered Vidar with the giantess Grid, and has only one eye because he traded the other for a drink from the Well of Wisdom. He has two wolves named Geri and Freki and two (*) ravens named Huginn and Muninn, and he can see the entire world from Hlidskalf (LID-skalf), his throne. He will be killed by Fenrir at Ragnarok, and owns the horse Sleipnir, the spear Gungnir, and the ring Draupnir. For 10 points, name this chief god of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin [or Wotan]

Result: 2243 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Andy and Hannah.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 22159

Question: One of these angrily crushed a jellyfish for failing to obtain monkey liver, and that one lives in a coral palace and owns gems that control the tides. One of these mutilated the sea slug for refusing to swear an oath of loyalty along with all the other fish, and the one of scholarship was created by the apotheosis of a politician and is associated with the ume tree. A marriage between two of them cursed a certain country's royalty of with early deaths. One of them was washed out of her father's left eye, and retreated to the Heavenly Cave after her brother went on a rampage. For 10 points, name these spirits like Raijin and Amaterasu, spirits from Shintoism.

ANSWER: kami [accept Shinto gods or Shinto spirits, early]

Result: 2244 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Andy and Hannah.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 22170

Question: The pharaoh must pass through the body of one of these creaturescalled Penweti, and Horus fought one of these, a son of Set named Maga. A local god of these entities at Athribis called Khenty-Khety was an avatar of Horus. One deity personified by this animal had a cult center at Kom Ombo and a hawk-headed son name Khonsu. That deity's mother was Neith, and he invented the fish trap in order to recover the severed hands of Horus. For 10 points, name this animal, which in Egyptian mythology is personified by Sobek, a predatory reptile often associated with the Nile.

ANSWER: crocodile

Result: 2245 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Carleton + Gautam.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 22181

Question: The first king of Ethiopia, Enalos, was married to this figure's daughter Benthesikyme. Asteria turned herself into the floating island of Delos after this god attempted to seduce her, and his union with Demeter produced Despoine and Areion. He changed another woman he raped into the Lapith warrior Caeneus, and Ovid says that Athena turned Medusa into a Gorgon after she slept with this god. He sent a monster to attack Troy after he and Apollo weren't paid for building walls for Laomedon, and he fathered Otus, Ephialtes, and Polyphemus. For 10 points, name this god whose wife Amphitrite bore his son Triton, the Greek god of earthquakes and the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon [accept Neptune or Neptunus until "Greek"]

Result: 2246 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Eden Prairie.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 22205

Question: This figure supposedly fulfilled a promise to Prosymnus by sodomizing himself on that man's tomb. Often identified with the Phrygian horseman Sabazios and the Orphic Zagreus, he was the dedicatee of hymns called dithyrambs. He was once captured by pirates but escaped by turning them into dolphins, and he and his followers were once imprisoned by Lycurgus. Hestia gave up her throne on Olympus to him, and he was reborn out of his father's thigh after his mother saw his father in his full splendor. For 10 points, identify this son of Zeus and Semele, the Greek god of wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus [accept Bacchus or Oeneus]

Result: 2247 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Finals Packet 1 (intended for championship round).doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 22216

Question: Alternate names for this god, who once fought a rival in the form of a seal,

ANSWER: Heimdallr

Result: 2248 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Finals Packet 2 (intended for championship round).doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 22254

Question: In one story, this god chews up and spits out another goddess' necklace, creating five sons he trades for three of her daughters. One of this god's sons taught a rabbit to heal its wounds and earned a princess' favor, after which this god's other 80 sons killed that brother by hurling a flaming rock at him. This god forces that same son, Oo-Namuchi to spend a night in a room filled with centipedes after Oo-Namuchi tries to marry this god's daughter, Suseri-hime. He found the sword Kusanagi in the remains of the creature he is most famous for slaying, and in another story, he dishonors his sister by using her temple as a toilet, then throwing a flayed horse into it. That sister then flees into a cave, blocking out sunlight from the world. Born when his father Izanagi washed out his nose, for 10 points, name this Shinto storm god and brother of Amaterasu, most famous for slaying the eight-headed serpent Yamata-no-Orochi.

ANSWER: Susa-no-o-no-Mikoto

Result: 2249 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Illinois.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 22263

Question: This figure created a lion-headed monster that devoured itself and left the Face of Glory in response to the challenge of Jalamdhara. This god eternally holds poison in his throat, which is why his neck is blue. One form of worship for this deity is the playing of certain rhythms on a damaru, while another for is the veneration of lingams, or phallic statues. Possibly derived from Rudra, this deity is sometimes depicted seated on a tiger's skin and sometimes on Nandi, a white bull that serves him. This bearer of the Ganges in his hair is known in his role as a lover as the consort of Parvati For 10 points, name this redeemer and destroyer of the Hindu trimurti.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 2250 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Iowa + Editors.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 22280

Question: In one poem titled for this figure, Odin disguises himself as Vegtam to find out why this deity is having bad dreams, and in the Gesta Danorum he is badly wounded by Miming's sword. The dwarf Lit died on one of this god's possessions, and that possession was launched by Hyrokkin. The land of "fewest baneful runes" was home to his hall Breidablik, and his brother Hermod

ANSWER: Baldur [accept Balderus or Phol]

Result: 2251 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Minnesota 1.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 22323

Question: This god's wife turned Leuce into a white poplar tree and Minthe into the mint plant.

ANSWER: Hades

Result: 2252 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Minnesota 3.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 22362

Question: Romulus and Remus were fed by one type of these creatures named Picus. Tasting the blood of Fafnir allowed Sigurd to understand them. The jotun Hraesvelgr took the form of one of them, and Fionnuala and her brothers spent 900 years as a type of them. A Sufi poem sees a "conference" of them cross seven valleys to find Simurgh, and the one representing Ra's soul was called the bennu. One king of them was the son of Kashyap and Vinata, and other myths describe a group of them being scared away from a lake with bronze clappers by Heracles. For 10 points, name these creatures, mythical examples of which include Garuda, the Stymphalian ones, and the phoenix.

ANSWER: birds [accept woodpeckers until "Hraesvelgr"]

Result: 2253 | MUT | 2009 | Round: MUT II - Minnesota 4.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 22396

Question: Figures in their myths include a pair of lovers that were turned into volcanoes and a group of drunken gods known as the "four hundred rabbits." One of their gods carried a seashell on his back representing the moon after refusing to jump into a fire to become the fifth sun, while another wore flayed human skin. A crocodilian monster covered in mouths caused one of their gods to lose his foot and replace it with a smoking mirror. Their rain god demanded child sacrifices, while a dog-headed skeleton god guided people to their underworld, Mictlan. For 10 points, identify these people who worshipped such gods as Tezcatlipoca, Huitzilopochtli, and Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Aztec mythology [or "the Aztecs" or other similar answers]

Result: 2254 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Finals.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 22444

Question: This figure has pure gold teeth and rescued a goddess's necklace by changing into a seal and fighting another figure who attempted to hide it under a reef. This figure's horse is Golltop, and he is a god of light. This member of the Aesir wields the sword Hofund and kills and is killed by Loki at Ragnarok. This god does not sleep and can hear grass grow, and the blowing of his horn begins Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this Norse god, the son of nine mothers who guards the rainbow bridge Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdallr

Result: 2255 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 22461

Question: This god whose weapons include the mace Kaumodaki and the chakra Sudarshana is often depicted sitting on the serpent Ananta, and he typically holds a conch shell in one of his four arms. This god supported Mount Mandara during the Churning of the Ocean in the form of Kurma, his turtle avatar, and he is also depicted holding a lotus. This blue-skinned god rides the bird Garuda, his consort is the goddess of wealth, Lakshmi, and another of his 10 avatars is Krishna. For 10 points, name this preserver god who forms the Hindu Trimurti with Brahma and Shiva.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 2256 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Round 10.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 22476

Question: This figure met his wife in the form of a deer while he was out hunting and eventually gave up on another woman promised to him, Grainne, so she could marry Diarmuid. This figure defeated the fire-breathing fairy Aillen at Samhain and his father was killed by a member of the Morna clan, leading him to be raised by Bodhmal and Liath Luachra and tutored by a Druid. The Giants Causeway was formed during a dispute between him and a Scottish giant and this father of Ossian was originally called Demne. For 10 points, name this Celtic figure who attained wisdom after he burned his thumb cooking the Salmon of Knowledge.

ANSWER: Finn MacCool [accept Fionn MacCumhail; accept Demne until mentioned]

Result: 2257 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 22529

Question: The son of Pelasgus and Meliboea was turned into one of these creatures for feeding Zeus human flesh and then attempting to kill him. That king of Arcadia was Lycaon, and Acca Larentia, the wife of the shepherd Faustulus, took over for one of these creatures in caring for twins. Another was bound with chains made with such ingredients as the beard of a woman while biting off the hand of Tyr. One of these named Skoll chases the sun while another suckled Romulus and Remus. For 10 points, name these creatures, exemplified by Geri, Freki, and Fenrir.

ANSWER: wolf or wolves [accept equivalents; accept Lycaon before "one of these"]

Result: 2258 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 22534

Question: This god granted the power of metamorphosis to Mestra so that she could escape the men her father sold her to and was called Genethlios, or Creator, by the Spartans. His son Sinis was a bandit killed by Theseus and his son Arion is a talking horse with two human feet, and this god caused Pasiphae to lust after a bull. This god of earthquakes also fathered Pegasus by seducing Medusa and had a dolphin bring him his wife Amphitrite. This god's other offspring include the slayer of Acis, the cyclops Polyphemus, and Triton. For 10 points, name this trident-wielding Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon [accept Neptune until "Genethlios"]

Result: 2259 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 22570

Question: One god of this became known as Ananga when Siva burned him with his third eye and has a weapon made of bees. In the Gita Govinda, Radha thinks she is being taunted by that god of this concept, and a goddess of this had a cult at Paphos and was the mother of Harmonia. Another goddess of this is demanded in marriage by Thrym but impersonated by Thor. A child of a goddess of this is mocked by Apollo over relative skill with a bow and desires to marry Psyche. For 10 points, name this concept presided over by Kama, Freya, Aphrodite, and Cupid.

ANSWER: love [accept gods of love or equivalents]

Result: 2260 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 4765

Question: This Arcadian wounded a creature sent to punish Oeneus for improperly worshipping Artemis and killed the centaurs Rhaecus and Hylaeus. This figure defeated Peleus in wrestling at the funeral games of Pelias and inadvertently led Althea to kill her son in order to avenge her brothers by tossing the brand that determined the length of his life into a fire. This figure's father Iasus left her on Mount Parthenius, where she was suckled by a bear. For 10 points, name this woman who was the only female Argonaut and refused to marry until Aphrodite's gift of golden apples helped Hippomenes defeat her in a footrace.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 2261 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 22610

Question: This people's mythology included an incident in which the wasps brocaded on a cloak given as a gift came alive, stinging the enemy chiefs. It also features the goddess Blood Moon, who became pregnant after her hand was spat upon by a severed head in a forked tree. Her offspring would later trick their bullying half-brothers into becoming monkeys and would defeat the crocodilian Zipacna and the pretender Seven Macaw before besting the lords of Xibalba in the ball game. Hunahpu and Xbalanque are the hero twins of this mythology, in which humans were made from corn. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican people whose myths are found in the Popol Vuh.

ANSWER: Mayans

Result: 2262 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 22625

Question: This mythological figure's son Nabu was a god of wisdom who controlled the fates of humans, and his consort was Zarpanit. After his greatest victory had been accomplished with a net and arrows, this god received 50 powerful names. As a child, he played with four winds given to him by Anu, which irritated a monster he would later face. His cult surpassed that of Enlil after his patron city gained power. He snatched the Tablets of Destiny from the usurper Kingu, out of whose blood humans were made. In the Enuma Elish, this god kills the sea dragon Tiamat. For 10 points, name this supreme god of the Babylonian pantheon.

ANSWER: Marduk

Result: 2263 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 22648

Question: This figure was known as Hipponous until he committed fratricide and was sent to a court at which he met Anteia, who told her husband he attempted to seduce her when he scorned her. This man's father was trampled by his horses, which were maddened by Aphrodite, and his grandfather eternally rolls a rock up a hill in Tartarus. This man tamed a creature using a golden bridle and attempted but was not permitted to ride Pegasus to Olympus after such deeds as killing a creature which was part goat, part serpent, and part lion. For 10 points, name this slayer of the Chimaera.

ANSWER: Bellerophon

Result: 2264 | MW GSAC XVII | 2009 | Round: Tiebreaker Round.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 22651

Question: According to Plutarch, this figure was responsible for the introduction of marriage, medicine, spinning, and weaving. This protective deity of Perehbet attempted to grant immortality to the son of Queen Astarte but was stopped when the necessary flames frightened the queen. That occurred while this deity was in Phoenicia seeking a coffin around which a tree had grown. This figure also created a snake to bite Ra and refused to heal him until he told her his true name, and she attempted to hide her husband's coffin in a swamp. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the wife of Osiris and mother of Horus.

ANSWER: Isis [accept Aset]

Result: 2265 | NTV | 2009 | Round: 01 TU.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 22668

Question: After saving the daughter of Cepheus and winning her hand in marriage, this character killed his rival claimant Phineus. While competing in an athletic competition, he accidentally hit his grandfather with a discus, thus fulfilling the prediction of the Oracle of Delphi that he would cause the demise of his grandfather. He stole the only eye among the Graiae in order to obtain information about their sisters. Acrisius had this character and his mother pushed out to sea in a box after Zeus fathered him via a golden shower. On his way to complete a task given him by Polydectes, he borrowed Athena's shield and Hermes' winged sandals. On his way back, he rescued Andromeda. Identify this son of Danae, the Greek hero who killed Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 2266 | NTV | 2009 | Round: 02 TU.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 22683

Question: In one story, this god consumed a special food doused in snake poison that made him invincible. After receiving a wound from a sword formerly guarded by Mimingus, Boe avenged his death. The god of justice, Forseti, was the son of this deity with Nanna. His hall was Breidablik, or "broad splendor". His ship, Hringhorni, was the largest in the world, but it was set alight by Hyrrockin as it was pushed out to sea with his corpse on it. His mother, Frigg, failed to procure a promise from mistletoe, and this fact led to the death of Hodur, who chucked a sprig of it at this god at the insistence of Loki. Name this Norse god of beauty and light.

ANSWER: Baldr

Result: 2267 | NTV | 2009 | Round: 03 TU.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 22713

Question: The masculine half of this deity is known as Purusha, while this figure's female form is called Satrap. Among the objects in his arms are a water jug, a scepter, and either a bow, string of beads, or spoon. Daksha was born from the thumb of this deity, who was born from a lotus springing from a navel of another deity. To keep Shatarupa within his sight, he grew five heads, but after falsely claiming to have found one end of the lingam while in the form of a swan, one of them was cut off. Name this deity who along with Shiva and Vishnu makes up the Hindu trimurti.

ANSWER: Brahma

Result: 2268 | NTV | 2009 | Round: 04 TU.pdf | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 22727

Question: This figure creatued Hu and Sia from his own blood. The Benu was said to be a manifestation of this god. He gave Sekhmet beer to end her slaughter of man, shortly after he sent his daughter to kill them as punishment for not making offerings. While bathing in the field of rushes, the epithet Harakhte is added to the name of this deity. This deity was bitten by a snake made using his own saliva, and as a result was forced to tell his secret name. He cursed Nut such that her children could not be born on any one day of the year. Also worshipped as Khepri, the pharaohs were said to descend from this figure. Identify this Egyptian solar deity.

ANSWER: Ra [accept Re; allow prefix of "Atum" or "Amun"; accept Benu before mentioned; accept Khepri before

Result: 2269 | NTV | 2009 | Round: 05 TU.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 22743

Question: One of these entities bore with the god Zephyrus the steeds Xanthus and Bailus, which were the mounts of Achilles. In one story, these creatures tormented King Phineus by stealing his food and defecating on his plate. Their chief employer was Hades, who used them to drag people who were unwilling to die into Tartarus, and in Dante's Inferno, they torture the suicides by gnawing on the trees they have turned into. Name these daughters of Iris, bird women with disfigured faces.

ANSWER: Harpies

Result: 2270 | NTV | 2009 | Round: 06 TU.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 22766

Question: This god borrowed a falcon cloak twice, once involving a male deity wearing Brisingamen, and another when retrieving golden apples. To make one figure laugh, he tied two ends of a rope to a goat's beard and his own testicles, and he once lost an eating contest with Fire. According to one tale, he causes earthquakes by shaking when poison touches his forehead and his wife Sigyn is not there to catch it. He distracted Svaldifari (SVAL-dee-fahr-ee) and mated with it, producing an eight-legged horse as a result, and another of his offspring had Tyr's (TEERZ) hand for a snack while being bound with Gleipnir (GLIP-neer). The father of Hel and Jormungandr (YOR-moon-gahn-dur), identify this Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2271 | NTV | 2009 | Round: 07 TU.pdf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 22781

Question: While a guest of Cocalus, this figure brought about the death of one guest by filling his bath with boiling water. Pausanius believed this man to be the creator of carpentry, attributing to him items like the saw, the axe, and the plumb line. In one myth about this man, he is discovered when he uses an ant to thread a piece of string through a seashell; in another myth, this man pushes his nephew Perdix off of a high cliff because he is jealous of his potential as an inventor. Name this man whose symbol was a delta, who created the labyrinth for King Minos, and whose son Icarus died when he flew too close to the sun.

ANSWER: Daedalus

Result: 2272 | NTV | 2009 | Round: 08 TU.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 22803

Question: This creature is associated with the Chinese Feng-Huang, Egyptian Benz, and Hindu Garuda. According to Ovid, this creature lives on frankincense and odoriferous gums, and once every five hundred years this creature approaches Heliopolis to deposit an egg on the sun god's altar. This creature lives near a cool well, and its tears can heal any wound. Shakespeare wrote a poem about a turtle dove and one of these animals, which looks like an eagle with purple wings. Name this bird who, upon dying, bursts into flames and is reborn.

ANSWER: phoenix

Result: 2273 | NTV | 2009 | Round: 09 TU.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 22824

Question: This mythological figure fathered Agrius and Latinus, and he defeated one enemy by first giving him wine from the priest Maron. This man captured Helenus, who told him how to end the siege of a walled city. This figure was killed by one of his less famous sons, Telegonus, whose mother transformed some of this man's crew into swine. Name this mastermind of the Trojan horse, father of Telemachus, and husband of Penelope, who reigned at Ithaca and was the subject of a Homeric epic.

ANSWER: Odysseus

Result: 2274 | NTV | 2009 | Round: 10 TU.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 22832

Question: In one version of his birth, this figure is the son of Nephthys and Ra, and his cult was located in Cynopolis. His daughter, Kabechet, is a celestial serpent or ostrich that purifies or quenches a monarch. This god is represented by a full black canid wearing ribbons while holding a flagellum in the crook of his arm. It is his responsibility to weigh Ma'at, a feather, against a deceased person's heart. Name this jackal-headed Egyptian god of embalming and death.

ANSWER: Anubis

Result: 2275 | NTV | 2009 | Round: finals 2 TU.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 22878

Question: This figure is sometimes referred to as Mekhenty-er-irty, or "he who has no eyes," while his childish aspect is called Harpokrates (har-PAWK-ruh-teez). When his vision is impaired, he has been known to decapitate the deities fighting at his side. His elder form was among the children of Geb and Nut, while in his younger form, he tore off one leg and the testicles of his uncle during an eighty-year fight he waged against his uncle Seth as vengeance for the death of his father. Identify this falcon-headed Egyptian god, the son of Osiris.

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 2276 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 1.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 22901

Question: This man convinced Hermes's son Myrtilus to replace Oenomaus's chariot axles with wax so that he could defeat him in a chariot race and win the hand of his eventual wife, Hippodamia. Those actions drew a curse on this man's family, which including his children Chrysippus, Thyestes, and Atreus. This man's boastful sister Niobe lost her children to Apollo and Artemis, and Hephaestus reconstructed part of this man's body from ivory after Demeter consumed it. For 10 points, name this figure who was served as a meal to the gods by his father Tantalus.

ANSWER: Pelops

Result: 2277 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 10.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 22910

Question: One of these people's goddesses became pregnant after eating fruit containing sperm from their moon god Coniraya, after which she and her son jumped into the sea and turned into rocks. One god of these people was said to wear shining clothes and to carry the Milky Way in a jug, from which he would dispense rain. Their god Supay was the king of a race of demons and the ruler of the underworld, known to them as Uku Pacha. In addition to the weather god Ilyap'a, their deities included the benevolent sun god Inti. For 10 points, name these people whose creator god Viracocha was the grandfather of Manco Capac, the legendary first king of Cuzco.

ANSWER: Incans

Result: 2278 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 10.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 22927

Question: One of this man's brothers, Periclymenus, was killed after changing into an eagle and being shot by Hercules, and a similar fate was shared by the rest of his family. In the Metamorphoses, this man recounts the story of Caenis and the battle between the Lapiths and the Centaurs, while in the Iliad, he advises Patroclus on the urgency of disguising as Achilles. One of this man's sons, Antilochus, finished second in the chariot race at the games for Patroclus, and another, Peisistratus acted as charioteer for Telemachus after he visited their sandy shores in search of Odysseus. For 10 points, name this king of Pylos, an old wise son of Neleus.

ANSWER: Nestor

Result: 2279 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 11.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 22947

Question: This figure successfully negotiated the surrender of Galehaut and fought the Copper Knight at the castle of Dolorous Guard, after which he found his true name under a metal slab and renamed the castle Joyous Guard. He crossed the Sword Bridge on his way to defeat Meleagant, an adventure on which he gained the appellation "Knight of the Cart." He is the son of King Ban and Elaine of Benoic, and with Elaine of Carbonek, the daughter of the Fisher King, he fathers Galahad. For 10 points, identify this greatest Knight of the Round Table, who lost King Arthur's trust by having an affair with his wife Guinevere.

ANSWER: Sir Lancelot du Lac [accept Launcelot]

Result: 2280 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 11.doc | Question: 23 | Mythology | ID: 22957

Question: Late in life, this figure refuses to save the life of Diarmuid with the healing powers possessed by water drunk from his hands, still miffed over not getting with Grainne. the Earlier he used his own spear-point to keep himself awake despite the magic of the fairy Aillen, whom he killed to Originally given the name Deimne, he got his better-known name when his hair turned white, and his son, Ossian, was the greatest poet in Ireland. For 10 points, identify this Irish hero whose father was killed by Goll Mac Morna and who once burned his thumb while cooking the Salmon of Knowledge, the leader of the Fianna.

ANSWER: Finn MacCool [or Fionn MacCumhaill]

Result: 2281 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 12.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 22963

Question: The two chief temples to this figure were at Esagila and Etemenanki, and the planet of Jupiter, known as Nibiru, was sacred to him. This deity subdued the mushussu, a winged serpent that was later ridden by his son Nabu. Female figures in his life include his mother Damkina and his wife Sarpanitu, and he assigned the Annunaki to their proper positions. This god created humans from the blood of another figure; he also reclaimed the Tablet of Destinies from that figure, the demon general Kingu. For 10 points, identify this hero of the Enuma Elish, made chief god of Babylon as a reward for slaying the dragon Tiamat.

ANSWER: Bel Marduk [accept Amar-utu, Merodach, or Mardochaios]

Result: 2282 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 12.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 22973

Question: While fighting an impervious foe, he killed Menoetes to make sure his arm was still strong, and he ended up just pummeling that man, Cygnus, until he became a swan. He may have assumed the name Aissa while hiding in the court of Lycomedes, and some of his famous actions include killing the Amazon Penthiselia and fighting the river-god Scamander. For 10 points, name this figure whose death was brought about by an Apollo-guided arrow, and whose armor was the subject of a spat between Ajax and Odysseus, the greatest Greek warrior in the Trojan War who was killed at his only vulnerable point, his heel.

ANSWER: Achilles [accept Achilleus]

Result: 2283 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 14.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 23025

Question: The patrons of these objects were all members of the Souls of Nekhen and were depicted as a group standing on a blue lotus. They are named for the city where the temple of Serapis stood, due to a confusion of the images of Osiris there with these objects. In the Middle Kingdom, they bore human heads, but by the New Kingdom, they displayed a baboon, jackal, and falcon as well. For 10 points, Imset, Hapy, Qebehsenuf, and Duamutef, four sons of Horus, were the patrons of what objects, which stored the intestines, lung, stomach, and liver of an Egyptian mummy?

ANSWER: canopic jars

Result: 2284 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 15.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 23032

Question: Edmund Richardson relates one modern adaptation of this work to Oswald Spengler's historical theories and to the poems that appear in The Double-Axe. That adaptation, by Robinson Jeffers, omits the title character's appearance in Helios's chariot. This Greek drama was originally controversial because of Artemis's role in bringing the title character to Aegeus. The title character kills someone with a poisoned robe before killing her children. For 10 points, name this Euripides tragedy concerning the title character's revenge against her husband who left her for Glauce (GLAO-kay), Jason.

ANSWER: Medea

Result: 2285 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 16.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 23056

Question: This man founded the kingdom of Mycenae, which was later ruled by his sons, including Sthelenus and Electryon. He was raised by the fisherman Dictys after washing up on the island Seriphos after being put to sea in a box with his mother. On his most famous adventure, he received an adamantine sword from Hermes and a polished shield from Athena, after which the Hesperidae gave him directions to find the Graeae. He used the helmet of Hades to escape after slaying the sister of Stheno and Euryale. For 10 points, identify this hero and son of Danae who rescued Andromeda and killed the Gorgon Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 2286 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 17.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 23084

Question: Celtic myth features a trio of these figures who often took the forms of crows or ravens; they were Macha, Badb, and the Morrigan. One of these carried a temple in one hand; he was the Buddhist god Bishamonten, who was often conflated with the Shinto one of these, Hachiman. The Vedic one killed the stone serpent Vrtra and cracked open the cave of Vala to free the Ushas; that one was also the weather deity who killed Vritra, Indra. Greco-Roman examples include one who was the husband of Bellona and the lover of Venus. For 10 points, identify this bellicose type of deity, examples of which are Mars and Ares.

ANSWER: war gods/goddesses/deities [accept clear equivalents]

Result: 2287 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 17.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 23089

Question: This man lived in a house with seventy doors and seventy windows built by his sister, Ganieda. In his other invisible house of glass, he guards the Thirteen Treasures in penance for being seduced by Nimue. He prevented himself from being sacrificed by King Vortigern by leading the king to two dragons, whose fight represented the clash of Britons and Saxons. He was fathered at Carmarthen by an incubus; later, he enables Ygerna to become pregnant. For 10 points, name this figure who tells Uther Pendragon to found the Round Table and proposes the test of the sword in the stone; a bard and magician of Arthurian legend.

ANSWER: Merlin

Result: 2288 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 18.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 23100

Question: One story claims that this figure was told by Apollo to father sons with Tyro, his brother's wife. With his brothers Athamas, Cretheus, and Salmoneus, he was the son of Enarete and Aeolus, though some claim that he was a son of Autolycus. This figure discovered the body of Melicertes on the coast of Corinth, later founding the Isthmian games in his honor. He twice avoided death, once by requesting that his wife Merope refuse to honor him after his death and once chaining up Thanatos to thwart Hades. For 10 points, identify this King of Corinth who was cursed to spend eternity in Tartarus rolling a boulder up a hill, only to have it roll back down.

ANSWER: Sisyphus

Result: 2289 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 18.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 23104

Question: This figure was told by a tower of the route into the underworld near Cape Taneareum which had been used by Heracles. A group of ants helped her sort out a pile of mixed grains and seeds, and a reed advised her to wait until nighttime to retrieve some wool from the golden sheep. An eagle helped her retrieve water from the Styx for the same goddess who asked her to retrieve a box containing some of Persephone's beauty. That figure, Aphrodite, was angry that her son had fallen in love with this woman instead of punishing her. For 10 points, identify this mortal woman granted immortality after marrying her lover Cupid.

ANSWER: Psyche

Result: 2290 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 19.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 23129

Question: This figure's daughter Aslaug married Ragnar Lodbrok. He learned the language of birds after accidentally ingesting dragon blood, and a nuthatch warned him about his foster father's potential betrayal. That foster father helped reforge this man's sword from fragments given to him by his mother Hjordis; he was a son of Hreidmar named Regin who helped this man kill a gold-hoarding dragon. He also helped Gunnar, the brother of his wife Gudrun, win a shield-maiden for a wife. For 10 points, identify this hero of the Volsung saga and wielder of the sword Gram, the slayer of Fafnir and son of Sigmund who rode through the flames to win Brunhilde.

ANSWER: Sigurdr Fafnisbani [accept Siegfried or Sivard]

Result: 2291 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 19.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 23134

Question: One of her sons was killed by Heracles during the labor of the Geryon's cattle, and another had his skin worn by Heracles after the first labor. One son of this figure was killed just before a battle with the Solymi and, in addition to breathing fire, had goat, snake, and lion parts. Both the Nemean Lion and the Sphinx of Thebes were the product of her incestuous relationship with her son, Orthrus. She was the daughter of Chrysaor and Callirhoe. For 10 points, identify this mother if the Chimera and two further creatures involved in the labors of Heracles, the Hydra and Cerberus, a half-nymph, half-snake monster who bred many horrible offspring with Typhon.

ANSWER: Echidna

Result: 2292 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 2.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 23145

Question: This man's accomplishments include defeating a band of pirates led by Cheirmarrhus, and fighting the Solymi. The queen of Tiryns, Stheneboia, attempted to seduce him, after which her husband sent this man to Iobates of Lycia, whose daughter Laodamia he eventually married. He spent the end of his life on the plains of Aleion after his companion was attacked by a gadfly while he attempted to fly to Olympus. In his most famous fight, he fixed a block of lead to his spear, which was melted by his enemy's fire breath, killing it. For 10 points, name this rider of Pegasus and slayer of the Chimera.

ANSWER: Bellerophontes

Result: 2293 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 20 (mini).doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 23163

Question: After this figure was torn apart, the first pomegranate tree grew from his blood. His grand-mother Rhea caused the murder of Dryas by driving his father Lycurgus mad after Lycurgus denied this god's divinity. He was once captured by pirates who intended to sell him into slavery; he escaped by turning them into dolphins. This god's father took an oath on the river Styx to do anything his mother wished, and she wished to see him as he really was, resulting in her death. This god was then delivered from Zeus's thigh and was followed by the Maenads. For 10 points, name this Greek god from Asia, the son of Semele and the Greek god of wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus

Result: 2294 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 23 (mini).doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 23188

Question: One figure in this mythological tradition cuts a leg off a tortoise to alleviate problems caused by a water deity's angered head smash of a pillar. In another story from this tradition, the clothes of seven fairies are hidden away by a mischievous cowherd. One of the Three Pure Ones in this tradition passes 3200 trials each lasting 3 million years, and a female deity in this myth system lives on the moon with a rabbit and is the consort of an archer deity who shot down nine of the ten suns. Featuring Eight Immortals, Pangu, the Jade Emperor, and an insufferable monkey, for 10 points, name this mythological tradition first codified during the Han dynasty.

ANSWER: Chinese mythology [or equivalents as long as they include a form of China], accept Taoism or Daoism

Result: 2295 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 3.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 23206

Question: This figure's father was the bard Fedlimid mac Diall, who had her raised in seclusion by Leabharcham. Cathbad the druid foretold her eventual fate after hearing her cry out while still in her mother's womb. Eogan Mac Durthacht advised one man who loved this figure to send Fergus mac Roich to bring her back from Scotland, where she had fled with Ardan, Ainnle, and their brother, her husband Naoise. On their return, Conchobar mac Nessa had Naoise killed, and after a year, this woman killed herself out of despair. For 10 points, identify this figure from Irish myth, a woman whose beauty caused many sorrows.

ANSWER: Deirdre of the Sorrows [accept Derdriu]

Result: 2296 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 3.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 23213

Question: This figure thwarted the efforts of one of his children to marry when he stayed up all night with the suitor, Alvis, until exposure to the dawn turned Alvis to stone. This figure clubbed a fishing partner to death when Hymir cut this god's line, and he also created the tides during a drinking contest in which his cup unknowingly contained all the waters of the sea. This god once cross-dressed as Freya to retrieve a magical item that was rendered imperfect when Loki stung its creators in the form of a gadfly. For 10 points, name this husband of Sif and father of Magni, the wielder of Mjollnir and Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [accept Thunaer; or Donar]

Result: 2297 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 5.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 23245

Question: Surnames given to this figure, who was born in Thessaly, include Geminus and Matutinus. He was said to be the father of Tiberinus with his wife Camese, with whom he ruled Latium and sheltered Saturn, and his other children include Fontus, the god of springs. His extraordinary abilities of sight helped him catch the nymph Carna, who he turned into Cardea, the goddess of handles and hinges, and he used some hot springs to protect Rome from the Sabines. For 10 points, identify this god whose temple doors were always open during times of war, the two-faced Roman god of beginnings and doorways.

ANSWER: Janus

Result: 2298 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 5.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 23252

Question: One of this figure's nephews shared a name with a brass man created by Hephaestus to guard Crete, Talos, while this man killed another of his nephews, Perdix, out of envy. He helped King Cocalus and his daughters kill a visiting king by using an ant and some honey to thread a string through a seashell. That visiting king, Minos, had earlier locked this man and his son in a tower, which they were able to escape from by building wings and flying away. For 10 points, identify this father of Icarus and builder of the Cretan labyrinth, a noted mythological inventor.

ANSWER: Daedalus

Result: 2299 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 5.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 23259

Question: Meleagros encountered them after prayers from his mother Althaia, and Homer groups them together into a being he calls the "mist walker," who is responsible for the state of Theoclymenus in The Odyssey. They were the defendants in a trial put forth by Athena, where Apollo acted as counsel for the plaintiff, and one story says they were born from the ocean in the blood of Ouranus. For 10 points, give the collective name of Alecto, Megara, and Tisiphone, who endlessly plague murderers such as Orestes with the curses of the dead.

ANSWER: Erinyes [accept Furies or Eumenides]

Result: 2300 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 8.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 23322

Question: This figure's Slavic equivalent Ozwiena served the underworld god Peklenc. Philostratus claimed a bronze statue of her could be found at the shrine at Dodona. Children attributed to her include Iambe and Iynx; their father was said to be Pan. This Oread, or mountain nymph, fell in love with a son of Cephisus and Leirope who, in some stories, had been cursed by Nemesis, and who eventually turned into an eponymous flower. The unrequited lover of Narcissus, for 10 points, identify this nymph who was punished for distracting Hera by only being able to repeat what others said.

ANSWER: Echo

Result: 2301 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 8.doc | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 23331

Question: Parshvanath saved two of these creatures from a log in a fire, and they were reincarnated as the Yakshas Dharanendra and Padmavati; for this reason, that twenty-third Tirthankara is always depicted with one of them shading his head. Dionysian cults associate these creatures with wisdom and fertility, and Rome required vestal virgins to attend a sacred one. Egyptian temples had a special area reserved where these creatures were kept. For 10 points, name these animals, one of which was constructed out of bronze by Moses, and another of which is "cursed...more than all cattle" and doomed to eat only dust after convincing Eve to eat forbidden fruit.

ANSWER: snakes [accept any equivalents]

Result: 2302 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 9.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 23340

Question: One story says that late in this figure's life, she traveled to Italy, where she taught the Marrubians to tame snakes, and Ideomeneus decided against her in a beauty contest she entered into against Thetis. Hera agreed to make her children immortal after she refused the love of Zeus, which he offered after this figure fled Corinth for Athens and eventually married King Aegeus. That happened after this figure had killed her half-brother Aspyrtus to stall her father, who was pursuing a man who had recently stolen the Golden Fleece. For 10 points, identify this daughter of Aeetes and priestess of Hecate who married, then was abandoned by, Jason.

ANSWER: Medea

Result: 2303 | PACE NSC | 2009 | Round: PACE NSC 2009 - Round 9.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 23346

Question: The title "Melissa" was given to the "bee priestesses" of this goddess, and pigs were sacrificed at one festival celebrating her, the Themosphoria. While disguised as Doso, she stayed with King Celeus of Eleusis, where Queen Metanira prevented her from burning away her son Demophoon's (deh-mo-PHO-on's) mortality. Instead, this goddess gave Metanira's other son Triptolemus the knowledge of agriculture, which he spread to the rest of Greece. For 10 points, name this central figure of the Eleusinian mysteries, the Greek goddess of fertility and the mother of Persephone.

ANSWER: Demeter [accept Ceres]

Result: 2304 | Prison Bowl | 2009 | Round: Finals Packet 1.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 23391

Question: The weapon of this mythological figure was a gift from Aiofe and forged from the bone of a sea monster. He once fell in love with the fairy Fand, although Manannan used his cloak to make them forget the entire affair. He was harassed by the goddess Morrigan after rejecting her, and his death came at hands of Lugaid after eating dog meat. He had fourteen pupils total, and he was trained by the woman-warrior Scathach. He fought the Connacht army of Queen Maeve single-handedly during the Cattle Raid of Cooley. For 10 points, what nephew of Conchobar fought with the spear Gae Bulg and led the Knights of the Red Branch in the Irish myth?

ANSWER: Cuchulainn (prompt on "Setanta") [DU]

Result: 2305 | Prison Bowl | 2009 | Round: Finals Packet 2.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 23406

Question: Ahalya comes back to life when this character's feet touch a stone. He gains his wife by bending Rudra's great bow, and he conquers his nemesis with the help of that enemy's brother Vi

ANSWER: Rama [GT/GK]

Result: 2306 | Prison Bowl | 2009 | Round: Packet 1.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 23425

Question: This god's son, Cycnus, tried to confront Heracles near the Echedorus River, and lost in part because Athena blocked this god's attempts to save him. He often traveled with his counterpart Enyo, with whom he fathered Enyalius, and his sister Hebe often drew baths for him. His sacred animal, the vulture, was perhaps important to him because it fed on carrion. More famous figures associated with this god are Eris, the goddess of discord, and his sons Phobos and Deimos. Caught by Hephaestus while having an affair with Aphrodite, for 10 points, name this Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares (accept Mars) [PM]

Result: 2307 | Prison Bowl | 2009 | Round: Packet 10.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 23450

Question: His shield was made by King Evelake and painted with a cross of blood. He cured the Maimed King by anointing him with blood from the Dolorous Spear. Along with Bor and Percivale, he was thrown in prison by King Estorause upon arriving at Sarras. The last descendant of St. Joseph of Arimathea, his mother Princess Elaine became pregnant by tricking his father into thinking she was Guinevere. He asked God to release him from life after he was the only one able to sit on the Siege Perilous because he alone achieved the quest of finding an object from the Last Supper. For 10 points, name this son of Sir Lancelot, the knight of the Round Table who found the Holy Grail.

ANSWER: Sir Galahad [MT]

Result: 2308 | Prison Bowl | 2009 | Round: Packet 2.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 23467

Question: This figure spent time in Trachis, where he helped King Ceyx [KAY-ux] by killing the Dryopian leader Laogoras. In the Aeneid, Evander tells how his city was saved when he killed the monster Cacus. His visit to Pholus ended pretty badly when his poison arrow fell on Chiron's hoof causing ceaseless pain. He had three sons by Megara, and to help Admetus and Alcestis, he wrestled Death. Although he succeeded in chasing away the Stymphalian Birds, he died when he was given a poison tunic by his unsuspecting wife, Deianeira. For 10 points, what half-brother of Iphicles and son of Alcmene cleaned the Aegean Stables and killed the Nemean Lion as part of his Twelve Labors?

ANSWER: Heracles or Hercules [GT]

Result: 2309 | Prison Bowl | 2009 | Round: Packet 4.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 23503

Question: One princess of this city, daughter of Pandion and sister of Procne, weaved tapestry to tell her story when she was raped and her tongue was cut out by the Thracian king Tereus. In addition to Philomela, other royal members of this city include one whose deformity brought Herse and Agraulus to insanity, the result of an attempted rape by Hephaestus, Erichthonius. After the death of Androgeus, this city had to give up young men and women every few years as sacrifice. The people of this city chose an olive tree over a spring of salt water after Cecrops challenged Poseidon and a goddess to give gifts. For 10 points, what city is named for the Greek goddess of wisdom?

ANSWER: Athens or Athenai [GT]

Result: 2310 | Prison Bowl | 2009 | Round: Packet 5.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 23532

Question: In Basque mythology, one of these named Beigorri protects caves, while the Gauls worshipped a divine one named Damona. Cadmus was told to follow one to find his new home. Kamadhenu is the mother of these animals in Hindu myth, and according to the Prose Edda, one of these creatures created the first human Buri by licking salty ice-blocks. Daedalus makes a hollow one out of wood to allow Pasiphae to fulfill her lust, and a gadfly pursues one relentlessly after Zeus turned Io into it. Audhumla and Hathor take the form of, for 10 points, what creature revered in Hinduism?

ANSWER: cows (accept cattle, but not bulls, as they are female) [GT]

Result: 2311 | Prison Bowl | 2009 | Round: Packet 6.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 23545

Question: This mythological figure helped the Winnili defeat the Vandals by telling their women to comb their hair to look like they have beards. This deity lives at Fensalir, the Marsh Hall, attended to by Hlin, Gna, and Fulla. She is associated with Orion's Belt, which is also known as her distaff or spinning wheel. She is accused of having affairs with her brothers-in-law Ve and Vili, but more famously, she makes everything in the world except mistletoe vow to not harm her son. Her son Hod, however, does end up killing Balder. For 10 points, name this Norse goddess of love and fertility, the wife of Odin.

ANSWER: Frigg [DU]

Result: 2312 | Prison Bowl | 2009 | Round: Packet 8.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 23581

Question: The primary text of Theosophy, written by Helena Blavatsky, is named for this goddess "Unveiled". She is the mother of the four protectors of the canopic jars, and she teaches weaving, baking, and beer-making. In one myth, she makes the first cobra from Ra's tongue and obtains his secret name by curing his snakebite. She is associated with the star Sirius because her cry could cause the Nile River to flood every year. This daughter of Geb and Nut recovers fourteen pieces of a god, except for one eaten by a fish, and uses her magic skills to put together and resurrect Osiris. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the mother of Horus and the wife and sister of Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis [MT]

Result: 2313 | Prison Bowl | 2009 | Round: Packet 9.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 23612

Question: One son of this god, who became a king of Alba Longa, came after he caught a flirtatious nymph who would tease her suitors and run away, Carna [CAR-na]. According to one source, he came from Thessaly to marry Camese, although he later married Juturna, by whom he sired Fontus. He prevented the invasion of the Sabines by making a hot spring erupt, and the gates of his temples are opened during war and closed during peace. One of his faces looks into the past and the other looks into the future. For 10 points, name this Roman god of the beginning and the end, the namesake of the first month of the year.

ANSWER: Janus [DU]

Result: 2314 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round1.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 23615

Question: This figure may be related to the Ugaritic god of craftsmen, Kothar-wa-hasis. Among the Hittites this figure was called Ulluyash. A Sumerian tablet in which the titular king gives advice to this man is called the Instructions of Shuruppak. The scribe Ipiq-Aya authored an Akkadian epic about this figure, who is also called Ziusudra or Atrahasis. This son of Ubara-Tutu tells another character to stay up for six days and seven nights, and when that fails this character tells a story about a magical plant at the bottom of the sea. For ten points, name this figure from Mesopotamian myth who survives the world flood and gives advice about immortality to Gilgamesh.

ANSWER: Ut-napishtim [accept Atrahasis, Ziusudra, or Ulluyash until mentioned]

Result: 2315 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round1.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 23618

Question: One aspect of this deity, Sospita, had a major temple at Lanuvium and appeared to people in dreams wearing a goat skin. Another aspect of this deity, Curitis, served as the protector of Roman spearman and the first day of each month in the Roman calendar was dedicated to this figure. The month of February was sacred to her and a festival held in this goddesses' honor featured man coupling with a woman whose name he drew at random from a box. Worshipped ardently at Samos, this goddess was responsible for inciting a group of women to burn their leader's ships at Sicily. She drew the ire of one of her favorites, Turnus, when she disguised herself as his enemy and drove him away from the battlefield. More famously, this goddess cooked up a rainstorm that led to Dido and Aeneas making love in a cave. For ten points, name this goddess of marriage and childbirth, the queen of the Roman pantheon and the wife of Jupiter.

ANSWER: Juno (do not accept Hera)

Result: 2316 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round1.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 23622

Question: In the Aeneid, it is Minerva's killing of one figure with this name that Juno uses as justification for continual harassment of Aeneas. According to Hyginus, that son of Eriopis killed fourteen men during the Trojan War, including the Amazon Derinoe. That figure, who finished second in the footrace at Patroclus' funeral, raped Cassandra in the temple of Athena. In addition to that aforementioned figure, another man with this name fathered Eurysaces and Philaeus and fought with a shield consisting of the hide of seven bulls. That husband of Tecmessa killed Achamas, Laodamas and the grandson of Bellorophon, Glaucus during the Trojan War. In single combat, he used a massive rock to fight Hector to a draw. When this king of Salamis was not awarded Achilles' armor, he went mad and killed himself. For ten points, give the shared name of these two figures, the lesser of which was the son of Oileus and the greater of which was the son of Telamon.

ANSWER: Ajax

Result: 2317 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round1.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 23629

Question: This figure is assisted by children who include Lakwa and Nibo and who are associated with the banda dance, which mimics sexual intercourse, a nod to this figure's secondary aspect as a sex deity. Apart from being assisted by the Guede spirits, this god can be honored by wearing purple and black, and he has a feast day on November 2, which coincides with the Catholic holiday of All Souls Day. This husband of Maman Brigitte wears a tuxedo, top hat, and dark glasses, and can save the ill by refusing to dig their graves or greet them in the underworld. For ten points, name this Voodoo loa of death.

ANSWER: Baron Samedi or Bawon Samedi

Result: 2318 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round1.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 23630

Question: According to Lithuanian folklore, Vilnius was founded after Grand Duke Gediminas dreamt of one of these animals made of iron. One of these animals named Asena is credited with leading the Turks out of their original homeland. The Welsh king Vereticus was transformed into one of these creatures by St. Patrick, while the Norse priestess Hyndla rides one of these creatures. A monument to one of these animals is notably housed on its namesake Capitoline Hill in Rome, and two of these cause eclipses in Norse myth by attempting to eat the sun and moon. For ten points, name this predatory mammal, a female of which suckled Remus and Romulus.

ANSWER: wolf [accept: Canis lupus]

Result: 2319 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round1.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 23631

Question: This figure is not Rama, but Golu or Kolu dolls are made in honor of one of this figure's victories during the festival of Navaratri. In response to skepticism about this figure's martial prowess, this figure once laughed so hard that an earthquake happened. This deity first emerged from the hermitage of Katyan, a holy man for whom this deity is sometimes named. Born from the combination of multiple beams of light, this deity slew Mahishasur, a buffalo demon who could not be defeated by man or god, a trait that led the devas to create this goddess. For ten points, name this ten-armed Hindu goddess who represents the combined power of all the Hindu gods.

ANSWER: Durga

Result: 2320 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round1.doc | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 23634

Question: In Japanese tradition, a dragon of this color guards the eastern signs of the zodiac, while in Christian art Cherubim are traditionally dressed in robes of this color, in contrast to the red robes of Seraphim. Among the Ancient Hebrews, this color was made from the hilazon snail. Halahala, a poison created during the churning of the ocean, turned Shiva's throat this color, which is also the color of the non-white parts of a tzitzit, or fringe to a Jewish prayer shawl. For ten points, name this color of Vishnu, as well as of the sky and the sea.

ANSWER: blue

Result: 2321 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round2.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 23635

Question: This figure owned a three-cornered spear with a wolf on the blade, a bruin on the tip, and a colt on the shaft, which he used to lay low a bear that had been sent to ravage his lands. He once found a crying boat and consoled it by outfitting it as a great warship. This man consulted the sleeping giant Antero Vipunen to discover the lost words he once sought in the underworld. This man once forced one rival neck-deep into a bog and thus won the hand of Aino, who drowned herself rather than marry this man. He built a kantele of pike bones and can perform magic by singing. For ten points, name this steadfast old man and primary hero of the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Vainamoinen

Result: 2322 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round2.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 23637

Question: This figure's son, Polyphoites, buried Calchas and commanded Thessalian forces during the Trojan War and his sister, Phisidiae, was given to Helen as a servant. This mythological figure was imprisoned in a place known as Cichyrus, after his failed attack on the kingdom of Thesprotia. Thought by some to a child of Ixion, this son of Dia married a granddaughter of Boreas and daughter of Butes, Hippodamia. Heracles tried but failed to free this king of the Lapiths from his imprisonment in Hades, which was brought about when this figure attempted to abduct Persephone. That abortive abduction was aided by his constant companion, whose exploits included killing the Marathonian bull, stealing Helen and killing the Minotaur. For ten points, name this trickster and best bud of Theseus.

ANSWER: Pirithous

Result: 2323 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round2.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 23639

Question: Notable deeds of this figure include winning the Battle of Keekatpur against the Sunyavadis, as well as the abolition of cannibalism among the mleccha kings. This figure is trained in martial arts by the Chiranjeevin, a group of immortals, and this figure's birthplace is traditionally given as the hidden kingdom of Shambhala. This figure is depicted with a sword in his right hand, and his mount is Devadatta, a winged horse of pure white, and this figure represents the end of the Kali Yuga, or present era. For ten points, name this final avatar of Vishnu, who will return in the future.

ANSWER: Kalki

Result: 2324 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round2.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 23640

Question: This creature has a similar looking assistant known as the Wagyl. In one story, this creature tickles some frogs, causing them to laugh, which results in the release of water into the world. This creature is said to have punished the first law breakers by turning them into stone, and it may be a rival or enemy of the sun. The frequency of belief in this being among vastly different tribes was noted by Radcliffe-Brown, who coined the English term for it. This creature currently dwells in permanent waterholes, but used its body to create rivers, mountains, and valleys during the Dreamtime. For ten points, name this reptile from Aboriginal myth, whose name suggests that it is multi-colored and slithering.

ANSWER: rainbow serpent [accept: rainbow snake; ngalyod; borlung]

Result: 2325 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round2.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 23642

Question: This figure convinces the son of Urien to join him on some adventures while appearing as a non-titular character in Ywain, Knight of the Lion. The most famous story about this man begins with an account of the Fall of Troy and the founding by Felix Brutus of Britain, and that story describes this man as faultless in the five wits, five fingers, and five wounds, referring to intelligence, strength, and faith. This man shamefully fails to return a girdle given to him by Lady Bertilak, and he rides his steed Gringolet to a chapel in the woods to fulfill a deal he made on Christmas in Camelot. For ten points, name this knight of King Arthur, most famous for getting into a beheading contest with a mysterious green knight.

ANSWER: Sir Gawain [accept: Gwalchmei]

Result: 2326 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round2.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 23644

Question: According to Snorri, this figure founded the city of Sigtun. After the ten-year old boy Agnar brought this figure a drink, this figure correctly predicted that Agnar would long reign as King of the Goths. This figure can be identified because dogs do not attack him, and he drinks in the hall of Sokkvabekk. After refusing to believe that King Geirroth tortures his guests, this figure visits Geirroth, only to be tortured between two fires. This god wins the head of the giant Vafthruthnir in a trivia contest and his abode is build from spears and shields and is called Gladsheim. This owner of Freki and Geri also owns Draupnir and Gungnir and notably possesses the wisdom of Mimir. For ten points, name this one-eyed ruler of the Norse gods.

ANSWER: Odin [accept: Wotan; Wodin; Othin]

Result: 2327 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round2.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 23650

Question: The last pagan temple in Egypt, which was shut down by the Byzantine general Narses, was dedicated to this deity and located at Philae. This deity is associated with the tyet symbol, also called the "knot" of this figure. This figure was the only god who knew how to cure a snakebite, and by causing a snake to bite Ra forced Ra to grant this figure power over magic and life and death. Later, this figure used wax and gold to fashion a penis, with which she was then impregnated. This goddess is often depicted with her infant son, who would defeat Seth, the killer of her husband. For ten points, name this mother of Horus, the queen of the Egyptian gods.

ANSWER: Isis [accept: Ese; Eset; 'usat]

Result: 2328 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round2.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 23654

Question: In Book 10 of his Natural History, Pliny pooh-poohed Dinon's claim that these figures lived in India and expressed his skepticism regarding their existence. A temple was dedicated to them at Surrentum and the town of Lilybaeum was founded after Aphrodite saved Butes from this group. These inhabitants of Anthemoessa were responsible for the death of the Centaurs after their battle with Heracles. According to Ovid, these creatures served as Persephone's handmaidens and received wings from Demeter to help look for her. However, these daughters of Achelous lost their wings when they were defeated by the Muses in a singing contest. The music of Orpheus saved the Argo's crew from these figures and Odysseus' men plugged their ear with beeswax so as to not hear their song. For ten points, name these seducetresses of the Mediterranean, whose songs led to nautical disasters.

ANSWER: Sirens

Result: 2329 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round2.doc | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 23655

Question: According to one story, this figure and all other children born on May day were put on a rickety boat that sank, though this figure alone survived. Melehan is a son of this figure, and Geoffory of Monmouth says that this man's two sons led an army that was defeated by King Constantine III. This son of Morgause fights at the Battle of Camlann, where he participates in a duel with an opponent who is afterwards transported to Avalon. For ten points, name this villainous knight who kills King Arthur.

ANSWER: Mordred [accept: Modred; Medraut; Medrod]

Result: 2330 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round3.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 23661

Question: One tribe worshipped this god under the name Vanna-issa, and elevated him to the status of creator deity, and this god's wife is sometimes called Maaemonen. After one figure prays to this god, a yellow bird comes to lay eggs on her, resulting in the creation of the sky and earth. Apart from rescuing Ilmatar, this also married Akka, and when he mates with her storms happen. This figure is associated with a tool or weapon called the vasara. Via a bee, this god sent ointment that resurrected Lemminkainen and he has an eponymous hammer similar to Thor's. For ten points, name this thunder god from Finnish mythology.

ANSWER: Ukko [accept: Perkele]

Result: 2331 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round3.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 23668

Question: Rather strangely, this figure had both a wife and a daughter named Polydora, the latter which he sired with Antigone. Antigone would commit suicide when she heard from the Queen of Iolcus that this figure had married to Sterope. When this figure became jealous of his step brother, Phocus, he and his brother, Telamon, plotted and succeeded in killing him while practicing for the pentathalon. This man accidentally killed his father-in-law, Eurytion, during the Calydonian Boar Hunt. This son of Endeis was given the immortal horses, Balias and Xanthas by Poseidon, and with the help of Proteus, he was able to capture his third wife, who was a shape shifter.. At his wedding to that woman, an item inscribed with the phrase "Kallisti" thrown by Eris caused quite stir among Hera, Athena and Aphrodite, leading to a beauty contest judged by Paris. For ten points, name this member of the Argonauts, who was offered immortality by his wife, Thetis, and fathered Achilles.

ANSWER: Peleus

Result: 2332 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round3.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 23671

Question: The daughters of this deity dwell in the Munakata Temple. By slaying the obscure goddess Ohogetsuhime, this figure caused the creation of silkworms, rice, millet, beans, and barley. One story tells how this deity was compelled to compose a song upon seeing eight clouds, and the abode of this deity is the palace of Suga. This god performed a notable deed at the head-waters of the River Hi, where he transformed Kushinada into a comb to protect her from the eight-forked serpent, which this god slew. More famously, he wields Kusanagi the grass-cutting sword. For ten points, name this impetuous Shinto sea god, the brother of Amateratsu.

ANSWER: Susanowo [accept: Susano'o; Susanoo]

Result: 2333 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round3.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 23674

Question: Snorri states that this figure should be called "kinsman of Ali", and Vartari is a thong used by a dwarf to sew this figure's mouth shut. This brother of Byleist was once captured and held in a wooden chest by the villainous King Geirroth. He is represented by the Kaunaz, a vulva-shaped rune, and one of his sons created the Van River. This slayer of Fimafeng captured the dwarf Andvari in a net and is the son of Laufey and Farbauti and the father of Narfi. To delay the building of Valhalla, this figure copulated with a horse, but his usual consorts are Sigyn and Angrboda. The father of Sleipnir, Fenrir, and the Midgard Serpent, for ten points name this trickster from Norse myth.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2334 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round3.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 23675

Question: In Wendish and Slavic mythology, Flins was the god of this phenomenon. Ah Puch, a deity decorated with bells and associated with owls, was the god of this for Mayans, while the Incan god of this was named Supay and ruled the realm of Uca Pacha. Egyptian gods of this phenomenon include one depicted as a green falcon, Sokar. The Aztec god of this and thunder sometimes takes the form of a dog, Xolotl, and leads people to Mictlan. In Greek myth, those to whom this happened went to Hades. For ten points, name this phenomenon associated with the Grim Reaper, the end of life.

ANSWER: death

Result: 2335 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round3.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 23676

Question: The Mundaka Upanishad refers to this figure as the first of the seven tongues of Agni. This figure is attended by the Dakinis and once emerged from the forehead of the goddess Durga. To prevent the demon Raktavira from creating many small versions of himself, this figure licked drops of his blood while slaying him. Often depicted standing over the dead body of Shiva, her consort, for ten points name this Hindu goddess worshipped by the Thugee, who wears a belt of human skulls and represents darkness and violence.

ANSWER: Kali [accept: Kala; Kalaratri; Kalika]

Result: 2336 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round4.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 23679

Question: In the pre-Christian pantheon of Kievan Rus, this god shared his role with Khors, a similar deity possibily borrowed from Persia. In the Old Russian epic poem "The Tale of Igor's Campaign", the Russians are called the grandchildren of this god. This god's father slew the serpent Zmey, while this god's brother was a thunder god related to the Baltic god Perkunas. This son of the fire god Svarog was allegedly married to a happiness goddess for whom a shitty brand of Soviet car was named, Lada, and this god had a dog's head and traveled in the sky in a chariot. For ten points, name this sun god from Slavic mythology.

ANSWER: Dazhbog

Result: 2337 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round4.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 23681

Question: The Etruscans believed themselves to be descendants of this deity through his son, Tyrrenhus. This son of Tinia and Uni was often depicted as Cubans or reclining at table, which was memorialized in a statue ot the west of the Divus Hadrianus. Temples to this figure throughout the Italic peninsula have led scholars to hypothesize that this deity was important as a patron of herdsman and transhumance. An oracle to Demophon demanded that this figure's daughter, Macaria, be sacrified. In addition to attacking Pylos and slaying all but one of Neleus' sons,, this figure slew all but one of the children of Laomdeon during his sack of Troy. This man's first two wives were Megara and Omphale and he had to the fight the river god, Achelous, in order to marry his third wife, Deinara. For ten points, name this legendary figure, the cousin of Eurystheus, who was given twelve labors.

ANSWER: Hercules or Heracles or if someone thinking they are really smart and is all into Etruscan Hercle

Result: 2338 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round4.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 23682

Question: Japanese gods of this classical element include Kojin and Kagutsuchi, while the Voodoo Loa of this is Ogoun. Kresnik was an obscure Slavic god of this who was said to live on top of a golden mountain in Slovenia, and Chantico was the Aztec god of this. One goddess of this is the sister of Kapo and Hiiaka by Haumea, defeated Ailaau, and now lives under an island, while the Roman god of this element was married to Venus. For ten points, name this classical element associated with Pele and Vulcan, which might cause you to run around screaming "it burns, it burns!"

ANSWER: fire

Result: 2339 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round4.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 23687

Question: This figure is the father of Bergfinnar, and his kingdom is sometimes said to be Vermland in Norway. When first encountered, this figure is sitting on a mound keeping his dogs on golden leashes and this figure's stables contain cattle with horns of gold. This figure's sister rudely asks a guest to give her gold rings, and the plan that ultimately defeats this figure is hatched by Heimdall. This figure is slain while seeking the blessing of Vor, the goddess of vows, and his slayer is dressed as a bride and pretending to be Freya, but is really Thor. For ten points, name this giant who once stole Thor's hammer.

ANSWER: Thrym [accept: Thrymr; do not accept "Thrymheim", which is a building]

Result: 2340 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round4.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 23689

Question: According to 2007 ACF Nationals, this god has the power to make snakes OR children appear. One Chinese Buddhist story about this god identifies him with the dragon Lei Gong. In that story, this god and his counterpart, Feng She, were evil demons defeated by the Buddha's army of thirty-three gods. This god has a companion who leaves scratch marks on trees, and this god sometimes eats the navels of children. This god is depicted as large, red-skinned, and carrying a drum, while his brother and counterpart is depicted with a bag of winds. For ten points, name this Japanese god of thunder and lightening, a colleague of Fujin.

ANSWER: Raiden [accept: Raijin]

Result: 2341 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round4.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 23693

Question: This man's father served King Enmerkar, and one tablet recounts the adventures of this man's father "in the Mountain Cave". This figure was offered a gift of a gold chariot pulled by demons, but rejected the offer and the suitor who made it. He once dreamt of an axe which he loved as a wife, as well as of an unliftible meteorite to which he felt a sexual attraction. Ninsun the cow goddess gave birth to this figure, whose primary companion has the epitheth "sky-bolt of Anu" and lay with Shamhat the prostitute before helping this figure slay the Bull of Heaven. For ten points, name this best friend of Enkidu the wild-man, a king of Uruk with a namesake Mesopotamian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 2342 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round4.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 23696

Question: According to Frank Cross, the Nora stone, which dates from the ninth century BC, may contain a possible reference to one figure of this name. While Virgil claimed that that man was the son of Belus, Menander and Josephus stated that his father was named Mattan. That figure, who was described as "a monster of wickedness beyond of all others" killed his brother-in-law, Sychaeus, forcing Anna and her sister to flee Tyre. The more famous figure of this name was the grandfather of Adonis through his daughter, Metharme. According to Ovid, that father of Paphos declared that he was no longer interested in women after watching the lascivious actions of daughters of Propoetus. However, he would go back on this promise when Venus turned an ivory sculpture that he had created into a beautiful woman. For ten points, give this shared name of the evil brother of Dido and the lover of Galatea.

ANSWER: Pygmalion

Result: 2343 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round5.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 23700

Question: After Virokannas fails to slay a steer in this place, a mysterious black man rises from the ocean and completes the task, giving the people of this place a hundred tubs of meat. This place is guarded by a gray dog named flop-ears, and landmarks here include Lovers Bay. One figure is carried to this place by an eagle after having his steed shot out from under him by a defeated rival. The lord of this place is beheaded by Lemminkainen during a wedding to which he was not invited, and an underground safe at this location is home to the magical mill of plenty. Ruled by the witch Louhi, for ten points name this farm from the Kalevala, home to the maiden of the north.

ANSWER: Pohjola

Result: 2344 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round5.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 23701

Question: According to Tibetan tradition, this object has four heads, each of which is named for the sea monster Makara, while among the Jains this object represents Dharmanatha, the fifteenth Thirthankar. The sage Dadhichi died so that this object could be made from his spine. After Hanuman attempted to eat the sun like a mango, he was scarred for life by this object. It was first used to slay Vritra the serpent. This object's owner rides Airavata the white elephant. For ten points, name this primary weapon of Indra, sometimes depicted as a thunderbolt.

ANSWER: Vajra [prompt on "Indra's Thunderbolt" or "Indra's Spear" or "that thing that Indra uses to smite his enemies"]

Result: 2345 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round5.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 23708

Question: One epithet used in the Homeric hymn to this figure is Tritogeneia, which may refer to this deity's birth near Lake Tritonis in Libya. In the Iliad, the figure's priestess is Theano and this deity compelled Laodecus to break the war's initial truce by firing an arrow at Menelaus. This deity promised immortality to Tydeus, but reneged on the promise after he ate the brains of Melanippus. This goddess was the foster mother of Erichthonius, who was born when Hephaestus attempted to rape her and his ejaculate fell on the ground. This goddess, who was often referred to Glaukopis or grey-eyed, gave Tiresias the power of prophecy after she blinded him for seeing her naked while bathing. Usually depicted wearing a peplos, this goddess won a famous weaving contest by depicting how she defeated Poseidon became the patron of her namesake city. Born from Zeus' head, for ten points, name this olive-tree bearing Greek goddess of wisdom and warfare.

ANSWER: Athena

Result: 2346 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round5.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 23711

Question: This deity was honored during the "Procession of Wepwawet", part of a five-day festival dedicated to this deity and described on the Ikhernofret Stela. What was depicted as growing out of this deity's body, and the most notable shrine to this deity was at Abydos. The Ptolemaic dynasty created a new state god by merging this deity with Apis, and this god was usually depicted holding a crook and flail. His penis was eaten by a fish after he was cut into pieces and thrown into the Nile, but his body was stitched together and resurrected after he was killed by his brother, Seth. For ten points, name this ruler of the Egyptian underworld, the husband of Isis.

ANSWER: Osiris [accept: Aser; Weser]

Result: 2347 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round5.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 23715

Question: This man's granddaughter married Ermanaric, King of the Goths, and was trampled to death by horses for committing adultery. This man found a wife for one of the sons of Gjuki by riding a horse through a ring of fire. Grimhild erases this figure's memory, after which this figure marries Gudrun. This man tested his most famous weapon by seeing if it could cut through an anvil, and after this man gains the ability to understand birds, he slays his villainous foster father. This man's horse is a descendant of Sleipnir named Grani, and his sword is Gram. For ten points, name this Norse hero of the Volsung saga, who slays Fafnir the dragon and marries Brynhild.

ANSWER: Sigurd [prompt on "the noble hart"]

Result: 2348 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round5.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 23720

Question: The festival month of Panquetzaliztli was dedicated to this god, who ruled both the south and the left. This god's weapon is known as the turquoise serpent, and major sacrifices to him were made every 52 years at the end of calendar cycles. He was said to have created the moon when he slew Coyolxauhqui, despite the fact that she was his sister. This god was born from a ball of feathers and his name means "left-hand hummingbird", and it was this god that instructed the Aztecs to seek an eagle on a cactus holding a serpent and build Tenochtitlan. For ten points, name this blue Aztec god of war.

ANSWER: Huitzilopochtli [accept "Left-hand hummingbird" until mention]

Result: 2349 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round6.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 23726

Question: According to one account of this figure's death, when he begged his killers for his life, one of them replied that to let thus figure live would be as absurd as giving a wig to a captured priest. This figure claimed that he was raised in the mountains by the sun god Utu and did not know his mother or father, while in another account he claims to be the son of a mountain and a cave. This figure had seven auras, which were re-distributed after his death, and he once rejected a bribe of little shoes, big shoes, and the concubine Matur, responding to each offer with one of his seven terrors. An expedition of fifty men without wives or children were sent to fight this figure, and they were aided by the twelve winds of Shamash, the patron god of this figure's killer. For ten points, name this being appointed by Enlil to protect the Cedar forests, the first monster killed by Gilgamesh.

ANSWER: Humbaba the Terrible [accept: Huwawa]

Result: 2350 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round6.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 23729

Question: After killing Sinis, Theseus purified himself at an altar to this deity at the river Cephissus. When Aristaeus made a sacrifice to this figure, he sent the Etesian winds to Ceos, which brought an end to a severe drought. Temples dedicated to this deity include one at Sicyon to his aspect as Meilichios or gracious and one at Parna to his aspect of Apemios or the averter of Ills. One of this figure's sons, Iasion, fathered of Philomelus and Plutus with Demeter and another, Dardanus, founded Troy. Both of those children were results of his dalliance with the future wife of Pylades, Electra. This god, who disguised himself as Amphitryon in order to sleep with Alcmena, also fathered the three judges of the Underworld, Aeacus, Rhadamanthys and Minos by two different woman: Aegina and Europa. For ten points, identify this son of Cronus and the king of Olympus.

ANSWER: Zeus

Result: 2351 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round6.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 23730

Question: The people who occupied the town of Messana at the outbreak of the First Punic War were given a name meaning sons of this deity. Ovid claims that this deity's sacred bird was the woodpecker and along with Vulcan, this god was associated festival in which the trumpets of Rome were purified, the Tubilustria. Another festival to this deity featured a day of horse racing and was known as the Equirria. Sometimes known as Gradivus, this god's mother used the advice of Flora to find a flower from Olenus, which allowed her to give birth to this deity without the help of her husband. This god's priests guarded the arma ancilia, the twelve shields that this god made rain from the sky during the reign of Numa Pompilius. More famously, this god raped a Vestal Virgin, known as Ilia or Rhea Silvia, making him the father of Rome's founder. For ten points, name this father of Remus, the Roman god of war.

ANSWER: Mars

Result: 2352 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round6.doc | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 23733

Question: Archaeologists have discovered a prayer inscription addressed to this god, whose speaker asks this god for the stamina to please his woman all night long, which this god is described as being capable of doing. The hippopotamus is sacred to this god, which led to an unpopular ban on hippo hunting during a foreign dynasty of Asiatic invaders who worshipped this god, the Hyksos. Though he doesn't do so every night, this god occasionally uses a spear to slay Apophis in the underworld. In one story, this red-haired consort of Astarte is tricked into eating semen-laced lettuce by Horus, who avenges a murder committed by this god. For ten points, name this desert-dwelling Egyptian god of chaos, perhaps best known for killing Osiris.

ANSWER: Seth [accept: Set; Seti; Sutekh; Setech]

Result: 2353 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round7.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 23739

Question: While Labdacus was still an infant, this city was ruled by the regent, Nycteus. During Labdacus' reign, this city lost a boundary war against a city then ruled by Pandion. One female figure from this city fled to the court of King Epopeus of Sicyon after being raped by Zeus, while another was transformed by Hera into the goddess Leucothea. That woman, Ino, tried to have her husband, Athamas, kill her stepchildren, Phrixus and Helle. During the Trojan War, this city's forces were led by Thersander, who along with Sthneleus and Diomedes was one of the Epigoni. The Epigoni were the descendant of a group of men including Amphiarus, Hippomedon and Parthenopaeus, who had attacked this city while it was ruled by Eteocles. For ten points, name this Boeotian city founded by Cadmus, that was attacked by seven dudes and was ruled by Oedipus.

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 2354 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round7.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 23742

Question: The parents of this god were called the "Lion Twins". This god was sometimes called "The Great Honker", because the goose was sacred to him, and earthquakes were said to be caused by this god's laughter. He was given the epithet "father of snakes" and was often depicted with the head of a snake or as a reclining man. This god was the son of Tefnut and Shu, the deities of moisture and air. This god's consort is depicted as having a body of stars, and by her this god was the father of Osiris and Isis. For ten points, name this Egyptian god of the Earth, the husband of Nut.

ANSWER: Geb [accept: Gebeb; Kebeb; Keb]

Result: 2355 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round7.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 23746

Question: This figure allegedly induced chaos among the Titans by blowing on a conch-shell and in The Golden Ass, this figure tried in vain to console Psyche after she was spurned by Cupid. During the reign of Tiberius, this figure was declared dead by a ship captain who heard people on the shore shouting "Tammuz." One of this man's children made Demeter laugh for the first time since the abduction of Persephone by exposing herself. That figure, Iambe, was a result of this figure's dalliance with Echo. While Herodotus claimed that this deity's mother was Penelope, the Homeric hymn to this "keen-eyed" god states that he was the offspring of Dryope and Hermes. After this god's attempt to rape Syrinx was frustrated when she morphed into a clump of reed, this deity used those reeds to create his namesake pipe. For ten points, name this satyr-like Greek counterpart of Faunus and god of shepherds and rustic music.

ANSWER: Pan

Result: 2356 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round7.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 23747

Question: The god Akiguhi, known as "Master of the Open Mouth", was born from this god's hat. This god created the Ifuya Pass using chigaheshi, a divine rock. The goddess Yomotsushikome, noted for her ugliness, once chased this father of Aha and Hiurko. This god took up residence on Onogoro island and once created eight new gods by stripping his clothes during a purification ritual. During that ritual, this spear-wielding god also gave birth to important gods from his eyes and nose. With a name meaning "male who invites", for ten points name this elder creator god from Shinto and father of Amateratsu.

ANSWER: Izanagi

Result: 2357 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round7.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 23748

Question: This text claims that Saeming was born after Odin slept with Skadi, and it also lists Fjolne as a son of Frey. Domar, Visbur, Vanlande, and Swegde are among the more obscure figures to whom sections of this work are dedicated. This text states that Hoenir was afraid to make decisions without the advice of Mimir while the two of them were living as hostages among the Vanir during the Aesir-Vanir War, for which this text is a major source. This text also says how Thor founded Uppsala, and it is considered the first part of the Heimskringla. It was written for Haakan the Old by a certain lawspeaker of the Althing. For ten points, name this saga about the namesake dynasty of early Norwegian kings, written by Snorri Sturluson.

ANSWER: Yngling Saga [accept: Ynglinga Saga; prompt on "Heimskringla" until mention]

Result: 2358 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round7.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 23749

Question: This figure was raised by a foster father whose newborn horses used to be frequently stolen. Long after being raised by Teyrnon, this husband of Cigfa was killed in single combat at Y Velen Rhyd by the man who had stolen his pigs, Gwydion, and after following a white boar this man touched a golden bowl and became stuck. In order to avoid being blamed for this figure's disappearance, his mother's handmaiden covered his mother in puppy blood and claimed she ate him. The only figure to appear in all four branches of the Mabinogion, for ten points name this King of Dyfed, the son of Rhianon and Pwyll.

ANSWER: Pryderi

Result: 2359 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round7.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 23753

Question: This figure was worshipped as the great god Kunula by the Pomo people of California. Among the Okanogan people, it is said that this figure missed out on a chance to change his name despite using two small sticks to keep his eyelids open all night. The Nez Perce referred to this creature as Ma'i and said that he created the human race by climbing into a monster and tearing it apart from inside. Claude Levi-Strauss claimed that this was one of two animals to achieve mythic status because of their role as life-death mediators, along with crow. For ten points, name this Native American trickster god of canine persuasion, who in modern American lore chases roadrunner.

ANSWER: Coyote

Result: 2360 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round7.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 23754

Question: These figures are described having skins of honey. They once hid an animal's head at the bottom of a lake, but the head was later discovered and used as a weapon against Vritra. After Khela's battle, these figures gave an iron leg to a female horse, allowing Vishpala to win a race. These figures protected the sage Dadhyanc by giving him a horse's head after he taught them how to re-attach severed heads, angering Indra. Said to be Ushas's brothers, they drive a three-wheeled chariot and their name translates as "horsemen". For ten points, name these Hindu gods of medicine who are twins.

ANSWER: Asvin twins [accept: Ashvin twins]

Result: 2361 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round8.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 23758

Question: A commentary on this text begins by telling a story in which a god creates independent body parts that demand a body to live on and reject the body of a cow and a horse before agreeing to be placed on a human. The Khilani is sometimes added to this text, but is younger and considered apocryphal. This text is more frequently followed by the Aitareya. This text is read by the hotar priest during sacrifices, and parts of it were incorporated into a younger text called the Yajur. This text notably describes one figure taking only three steps to cross the universe, but it consists primarily of hymns to Indra. For ten points, name this oldest and most notable of the four Vedas.

ANSWER: Rig Veda

Result: 2362 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round8.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 23761

Question: Japanese legend tells of mountain bandits who could transform into this kind of creature named Tsuchigumo. The Navajo creator deity is said to be a grandmotherly one of these creatures, while the mysterious Great Goddess worshipped in Teotihuacan has many attributes of this creature. One of these creatures is said to own all the stories in the world and is notable for capturing a python and getting stuck in the wax girl. Yet another figure turns into this kind of animal after challenging Athena to a weaving contest. For ten points, name this type of creature, examples of which include Anansi and Arachne.

ANSWER: spider or arachnid

Result: 2363 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round8.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 23765

Question: In the Grimnismol, the abode of this god is the seventh to be described and is said to be the most free from evil fate, while this god's son dwells in Glitnir. In one story, this god's wife gives a gold ring to Fulla. A poetic edda named for this god sees Odin ride Sleipnir to the underworld to ask questions to a wise woman, who interprets this god's dream. This father of the lawyer Forseti dwells in Breidablik and owns the boat Hringhorni. His wife is Nanna, and Rind gave birth to Vali solely to avenge this figure after Thokk refuses to cry for him. For ten points, name this brother of Hodr, a beautiful Norse god tragically slain by a mistletoe.

ANSWER: Baldur

Result: 2364 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round8.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 23772

Question: The Canaanite analogue to this figure is Yam-Nahar, and this figure was sometimes conflated with the more recent Canaanite figure of Lotan. The messenger Kakka turned Lahmu and Lahamu against this figure. This figure's followers benefit from a spell which causes the sight of them to strike terror into any foe. Venomous snakes for this figure's army were birthed by Mother Hubur. This figure employed the general Kingu, was the lover of Apsu, and represented salt water, but when the gods appointed a champion to seize the Tablets of Destiny, she met her end. For ten points, name this primordial monster slain by Marduk.

ANSWER: Tiamat [before "Kakka", accept "Leviathan", as the first few clues apply to him too]

Result: 2365 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round8.doc | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 23777

Question: One figure who attempted to take this deity as a consort was the owner of Svadilfari. This deity once consulted the witch Hyndla to inquire as to the ancestry of Ottarr and was born at Noatun. At the hall Folkvangr, this deity greats half of the virtuous dead, with the rest going to Valhalla. This deity owns a hawk-feather cloak capable of giving flight, the boar Hildesvini, and Brisingamen the necklace. This deity rides in a chariot pulled by the gib-cats. For ten points, name this chief female Vanir, a Norse goddess of love who is the sister of Freyr.

ANSWER: Freya

Result: 2366 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round9.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 23782

Question: When Mount Helicon grew skyward after the Muses defeated the daughters of Pierus in a singing contest, Poseidon beseeched this figure to use his strength to halt its growth. While this figure helped his most famous companion defeat the Solymi and the Amazons, he was also responsible for that companion's death when he was stung by a gadfly sent by Zeus. This figure had an affinity for springs as he created ones at Troezen and Hippocrene and was found by his most notable companion while drinking from one at Pirene. Sometimes considered a son of Poseidon, this brother of Chrysaor was born when Perseus decapitated his mother. After this bearer of Zeus' thunderbolts was tamed by Athena's golden bridle, his companion used this figure's ability to fly to defeat the Chimera. For ten points, identify this winged horse from Greek mythology, who was tamed by Bellorophon.

ANSWER: Pegasus

Result: 2367 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round9.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 23787

Question: This man's daughter, Polydora, married Protesilaus, the first of the Achaeans to die in the Trojan War. Polydora was his only child with the daughter of Marpessa, though some sources claim that he was the father of a figure raised by Telephus. Only this man and Medusa did not flee when Heracles entered the Underworld and in return, Heracles promised to marry this man's sister, Deinara. This husband of Cleopatra killed the centaurs, Hylaeus and Rhaecus, as well as Iphicles and Euryplus, to protect the honor of one of his companions. This son of Oeneus also killed his uncles, Toxeus and Plexippus, when they refused to give that companion a prize because she was a woman. That murder so enraged his mother, Althaea, that she threw a brand that kept this figure alive into a fire. For ten points, name this hero, who fell in love with Atalanta during the Calydonian boar hunt.

ANSWER: Meleager

Result: 2368 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round9.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 23788

Question: In Korean myth, one of these animals that is more than 100 years old and disguises itself as a woman is called Bulyeowoo. In Chinese legend, they are called Huli jing, and a famous one was Daji from the Ming dynasty novel Fengshen Yanyi. One story about another Korean one of these involves a shape-shifting one who becomes a bride on the day of a wedding and is only exposed when her clothes are removed, and this animal is associate with the Korean kumiho spirit. In Japanese mythology, these figures often tricked overly proud samurai while in the service of Inari the luck goddess. For ten points, name this type of animal associated with the Japanese kitsune spirit, also the name of an American news network.

ANSWER: fox

Result: 2369 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round9.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 23789

Question: According to one text, this god's son is Loridi and his teacher was Loricus, whom this god slew at the age of twelve, while a different text claims that this god was raised by Hlora and Vingnir. This god rescued Aurvandil the Bold, the husband of the sorceress Groa, causing part of a shield to be stuck in his head, and one Poetic Edda consists entirely of this god arguing with the ferryman Harbath. This father of Thurd has the servant Thalfi, and he caused the deaths of Alviss and Hrungnir. The Grimnismol states that the best of halls is this god's hall of Bilskirnir, from which he can be pulled by two goats on his chariot. For ten points, name this husband of Sif and serial slayer of giants, the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [accept: Donar; Donner; Tror]

Result: 2370 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round9.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 23793

Question: In Sumerian mythology, Sirtir was originally the goddess of this animal, while among the Mongols the ceremonial shagai dice are made from the bones of this animal. In the Fennian cycle, Cas Corach helps Calite slay three she-wolves that were killing these creatures. This barnyard animal was associated with Amun, while Agni uses one of these as a mount. Zeus was depicted with one feature of these animals, and among the Jews part of this animal is made into a device used to announce holidays, the shofar. For ten points, name this wool-bearing animal that says "baah".

ANSWER: sheep [accept: ram; Ovis aries]

Result: 2371 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: Round9.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 23796

Question: In his youth, this figure used a nail to carve pictures of men, swords, and spears onto an oak tree, and he once avoided death by winning an argument over whom a certain god should shoot with a crossbow. This man turned cows into bears after he broke his knife while cutting bread. His sister committed suicide after he seduced her, and he refused to perform burial rites when his entire family died. This slayer of Untamo has a sword that sings that it will gladly kill him, leading to his suicide. For ten points, name this slave of Ilmarinen, a tragic figure from the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Kullervo

Result: 2372 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: RoundFINALS.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 23804

Question: Procopius incorrectly stated that this deity was the only god worshipped by the pagan Slavs, while in the Golden Bough James Frazer states that in Novgorod an eternal flame was dedicated to this god, and that if it ever went out the attendants were executed for negligence. Among the South Slavs, this god had the power to make Iris flowers grow, and his sacred plant was the oak tree. In pre-Christian Poland this god's symbol was drawn on the roof of houses to protect them from his wrath. This god slew the dragon Veles, perhaps with his magical axe, which always returned to his hand when he threw it and is similar to Thor's Hammer. The son of the fire god Svarog, for ten points, name this thunder god from Slavic mythology.

ANSWER: Perun

Result: 2373 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: RoundFINALS.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 23809

Question: Instead of slaying this man, one figure slices off the tops of three hills. This man died a highly ironic death at the hands of Conall Cernach, who shot the brain of Mesgegra at this man's head from a slingshot. This man, who dwelt at Emain Macha, killed Naoise and dispatched the messenger Fergus so that he can marry a beautiful woman he ordered raised in seclusion, Deirdre of the Sorrows. The most notable hero in this man's retinue received his name after slaying a hound of Chullain. For ten points, name this Irish King from the Ulster Cycle.

ANSWER: Conchobar mac Nessa [accept: Connor mac Nessa]

Result: 2374 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: RoundFINALS.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 23810

Question: This figure had dominion over Hnitbjorg mountain. This figure's brother has nine slaves, who slit each others throats while fighting over a magical rock that can sharpen scythes. This figure's mother was killed when a millstone was dropped on her head. Along with his brother Baugi, this figure was the son of Gilling, who was tricked into being drowned by the villainous dwarves Fjallar and Gallar. This figure's most famous possession is guarded by Gunnlod, his daughter, and was formed from the blood of Kvasir. For ten points, name this Norse giant, from whom Odin took the Mead of Poetry.

ANSWER: Suttungr

Result: 2375 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: RoundFINALS.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 23812

Question: In one form, this god gave birth to Prince Nintoku. The largest shrine to this god is found in Fukagawa. This god's crest is a mitusdomoe, or three-headed swirling vortex. According to legend, this god was once born to Empress Jingu and thus incarnated as Emperor Ojin. This figure was the patron of the Minamoto clan as well as the lord of fishermen. Many figures in the Tale of the Heike pray for this figure to guide their arrows. Syncretized as a Bottisatva in addition to being a member of the Shinto pantheon, for ten points name this Japanese god of war.

ANSWER: Hachiman

Result: 2376 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: RoundFINALS.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 23817

Question: Children of this god include Enbilulu, the lord of canals, and Ninazu, the lord of healing, and this god's wife bears the epithet "Lady of the Air". This god raped that wife to produce his first-born child, Sin the moon god. After this god was banished to the underworld he fathered Nergal. According to the legends of Nippur, where this god had a sacred gate, this god's servant was the son of Siris; that servant, the winged demon Anzu, is slain by this god's son, the heroic Ninurta, after stealing the Tablets of Destiny from this god. For ten points, name this Mesopotamian god of winds and lord of storms.

ANSWER: Enlil [accept: Ellil]

Result: 2377 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: RoundFINALS.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 23819

Question: During the Trojan War, this figure killed Peirasus, Deioneus, Admetus and two sons of Antenor, Medon and Achamas. After the war, this figure was driven from his hometown of Meliboaea and then settled in Italy at Crimissa, where he fought agains the Lucanians. Hyginus claims that after this figure fell ill, he was kept alive by King Actor's shepherd, Iphimachus. That illness would later be cured by either Polidarius or Machaon after Odysseus and Neoptolemus convinced this figure to come to Troy. Some accounts state that this son of Demonassa's affair with Chryse was the cause of this disease, while other state that Hera inflicted that illness on him for lighting Heracles' funeral pyre. For that act of kindness, Heracles gave this figure a special set of bow and arrows, which this figure used to kill Paris. The subject of a Sophoclean drama, for ten points, name this talented archer who was stranded on Lemnos after being bitten by a snake.

ANSWER: Philoctetes

Result: 2378 | RMP Fest | 2009 | Round: RoundFINALS.doc | Question: 23 | Mythology | ID: 23821

Question: This figure once mocked his enemies by single-handedly lifting a log that they were unable to lift as a group, which causes that group to fear this figure's strength. While helping to build a hut, this figure fakes his death by hiding in a tunnel and having ants bring his air and fingernails to the surface, only to emerge and kill the residents of the hut while they were celebrating his death. This figure's mother is Chimalmat, and his brother is Cabrakan. This figure is killed when he is tricked into chasing after a crab, at which point a mountain is dropped by him. Earlier, he created the Pleiades by treacherously killing the Four Hundred Boys. For ten points, name this incredibly strong villain from the Popol Vuh, the evil son of Seven Macaw.

ANSWER: Zipacna

Result: 2379 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 10 - Final.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 23870

Question: This substance was guarded by a figure who agreed to give up a small quantity of it for three nights of sex, and the person who eventually obtained it tricked nine slaves into slashing each other to death. It changed hands after a giant was tricked into stepping into a boat which was capsized and a millstone was dropped on his wife's head, and it was stored in Bon, Son and Odrerir before being placed in Hintborg by the brother of Baugi. A figure who disguised himself as Bolverk eventually stole it from Suttung, whose daugther Gunnlod was guarding it. Created from the figure created by spitting into a cauldron, for 10 points, name this substance, a mead created after Fjalar and Galar killed a certain Norse god.

ANSWER: Kvasir's remains (logical equivalents ok, just Kvasir is ok) or Mead of Poetry

Result: 2380 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 11.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 23884

Question: The Incan god of this was the chief priest of the moon god Coniraya, and one Shinto diety of this phenomenon cried so loudly at birth that he had to be sailed around Japan to calm him down. The Chinese diety of this phenomenon acquired his powers after eating from a heavenly peach tree, and has claws, bat wings, and a birds beak. Along with his bag-carrying brother, another god of this lost a protracted battle with 33 gods and has a companion who hides in the navels of children. In addition to Ajisukitakahikone and Lei Gong, an implement used to create this phenomenon was buried by Thrym, forcing its owner to dress up as Freya in order to retrieve it; that object is Mjollnir. For 10 points, name this atmospheric phenomenon controlled by Raijin, Thor, and Zeus.

ANSWER: Lightning or Thunder

Result: 2381 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 12.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 23900

Question: The forest in which Lif and Lifthrasir hide during Ragnarok is associated with this figure, as is a tree between that forest and Yggdrasil. He drinks from an object that shares its name with Heimdall's Gjallarhorn, and this figure was originally sent in exchange for Kvasir alongside a figure who helped Lodurr and Odin create the first human beings. This figure's companion constantly said "let others decide" at a series of negotiations when this figure wasn't present, leading to this figure's demise; however, his remains were embalmed with herbs. A companion of Hoenir, he is consulted for a final time immediately before Ragnarok, and the figure that consulted him previously sacrificed an eye to his well. For 10 points, name this figure who was beheaded and whose disembodied prophetic head counseled Odin.

ANSWER: Mimir

Result: 2382 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 13.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 23909

Question: Ea was identified with one of these creatures on Kassite tablets. Nu Gua uses the legs of one of these figures to hold up the sky, and the guardian of the north, Genbu, takes this shape. The Minogame is one of these creatures with a feathery tail. A figure who refused to attend Hera and Zeus' wedding was turned into one of these and was named Chelone, and Sciron pushed travellers off a cliff that contained a giant one of these creatures at the bottom. The I Ching was composed from trigrams printed on one of these creatures,

ANSWER: Turtle or Tortoise

Result: 2383 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 14.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 23930

Question: These figures' invasion of Thrace was were stopped by Mopsus and Sipylus after the former challenged their leader to single combat. Making their home near the river Thermidor, this group was once scared away by the ghost of Achilles on the island of Leuke. A young Priam once faught against them during their attack on the Phrygians, and thiese people visited the Gargeareans every year. Bellerophon defeated a group of them after being sent by Iobates, and a group of twelve of them joined the side of Troy during the Trojan War, and Tersites was killed after he made fun of Achilles for falling in love with their leader. Living on the island of Themyscira, in another story, Theseus kidnapped their leader, resulting in their namesake conflict against Athens; that figure was later killed by Heracles during his 9th labor. For 10 points, identify this mythological race that included Penthisilea and Hippolyta, a group of women warriors.

ANSWER: Amazons

Result: 2384 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 2 - Final.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 23948

Question: One practitioner of this activity had his age put in a box after visting Ryujin's palace, and was named Urashima. One figure in this profession quarreled with his brother Hoderi over an implement used to perform this action and was named Hoori. Dictys was performing this action when he discovered Perseus and Danae, and Maui tricked his brothers into performing this action repeatedly to create the Hawaiian islands. In Norse myth another instance of this action used the skull of an ox and saw a Jotun cut the line in fear. For 10 points, name this action used by Hymir and Thor to catch the Midgard serpent, which commonly involves a rod and bait.

ANSWER: Fishing (reasonable equivalents ok)

Result: 2385 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 3 - Final.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 23976

Question: One figure with this name was a brother of Poltys killed by Heracles. Another figure by this name took refuge with Cilix after being banished, and later quarreled over Miletus with his brothers Minos and Rhadamanthus. Evander was the son of that figure, who step-fathered another figure of this name whose body was giving to Hypnos and Thanatos to carry to Lycia after his death, which was foreshadowed by a shower of bloody raindrops. This figure's unit distracted Teucer and Ajax from Hector's attack, and he convinced Glaucus to join his unit by considering the glory to be won. He killed Achilles only mortal horse before being killed by Patroclus, after which his father asked Apollo to save his corpse. For 10 points, name this king who allied with Troy, a son of Laodaimia and Zeus.

ANSWER: Sarpedon

Result: 2386 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 4 - Final.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 23997

Question: One figure of this name was a son of Eos and Cephalus who was stolen by Aphrodite to become a shrine guardian, while the more famous figure of this name had magic oil placed on his forehead by Apollo. His sisters include Aetheria and Dioxippe, and this figure's father was once involved in a dispute with Poseidon over the Isthmus of Corinth, which was settled by Briareus. His sisters figures turned into poplar trees that cried amber after his death, and this figure's step-father was the king Merops. After learning about his parentage from his mother Clymene, his father swore an oath on the river Styx, leading to Africa being turned into a desert. Killed by a thunderbolt and falling into Eriadnos, for 10 points, name this figure who asked to drive his father Helios' sun-chariot, but couldn't control it.

ANSWER: Phaeton

Result: 2387 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 6 - Final.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 24020

Question: This diety supposedly gnawed off her father's arm due to overwhelming hunger. In one story , she is seduced by a bird spirit into marriage, but another version she marries a dog because the suitors her father presents her aren't good enough.

ANSWER: Sedna or Nerrivik or Arnarquagssaq

Result: 2388 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 7 - Final.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 24046

Question: The Fates granted one of this figure's lovers, Ampelos, a second life after he was killed in a bad bull-riding accident near the River Pactolus. Though known in some cult centers as Meilichios or "Sweet", this figure received human sacrifices at Chios and Tenedos, earning him the epithet, Omadios or "Eater of Flesh." This father of Oenopion and Deianara was believed to have been the first person to build a bridge across the Euphrates, which allowed him to conquer India. Sometimes known as Zagreus, this god made his divinity clear when he turned a bunch of Tyrrhenian sailors into dolphins and had Pentheus torn to death by his very own mother. Hestia would give up her seat at Olympus in order to accommodate this figure, who fell in love with an abandoned woman on the island of Naxos, Ariade. The Maenads and Bacchae were, for 10 points, the followers of what Greek god of wine?

ANSWER: Dionysius

Result: 2389 | THUNDER | 2009 | Round: THUNDER Round 8 - Final.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 24057

Question: This figure allowed Biton and Cleobis to die in their sleep after they pulled a cart to a festival in their honor, and this figure had Jason and Medea kill Pelias for murdering Sidero. Also responsible for killing Lamia's children, this figure kidnapped the Goddess of Childbirth to prevent Leto from going into labor, but eventually let her go. She created the milky way while nursing the infant Heracles, and later condemned Heracles to his 12 labors at the hands of Eurystheus. The mother of Ares, Hebe, and Eris, this figure asked about the creator of a jewel worn by Thetis, discovering that Hephaestus had surivived her knocking him out of Olympus. Also responsible for turning Tieresias into a woman, for 10 points, name this long-suffering wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 2390 | U. of Georgia CCC | 2009 | Round: Missouri State Game 1 - sorted.docx | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 24084

Question: Most of these creatures were the offspring of a cloud in the image of Hera called Nephele and Ixion. One of these creatures gave Deianira a sample of his poisoned blood and told her that it would ensure Heracles' eternal love and another one, Pholus, reluctantly let Heracles open the communal jug of wine given to these creatures by Dionysus. In addition to Nessus, another one of these creatures born of Philyra and Cronus saved Peleus after Acastus stole his sword and tutored Jason and Asclepius. Famous for an attack led by Eurytion against the Lapiths, for 10 points, name this race of which Chiron was a member, pictured as half-man, half-horse.

ANSWER: Centaurs

Result: 2391 | U. of Georgia CCC | 2009 | Round: Missouri State Game 1 - sorted.docx | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 24090

Question: One of this figure's sons was the king of Chios and blinded Orion. This father of Oenopion was equated with the Phrygian god Sabazius and was educated by Silenus. Sometimes called Zagreus, this god was responsible for giving Midas his golden touch. He persuaded his aunt Agave and the Maenads under her control to kill his cousin Pentheus and married Ariadne after Theseus abandoned her. This figure's mother was killed when she asked to see Zeus in all his glory; Zeus then put this figure in his thigh. For 10 points, name this "twice-born" son of Semele, the Greek god of fertility and wine, equated with the Roman Bacchus.

ANSWER: Dionysus

Result: 2392 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 1 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 55430

Question: Among the obstacles he faced on his greatest quest was the mountain Mainaka, which could grow to any size. He utilized his speed to avoid the serpent Surasa and crossed the last of the one hundred yojanas necessary to seek his quarry. It was at his urging that King Sugreeva had earlier agreed to give aid to his future master, who would learn to utilize this figure's special skills. His father told that he would be the greatest of the Vanaaras, and among his feats earning that title were the recovery of the Sanjivani herb to save Lakshman's life and nearly burning the entire city of Lanka. His mother was Anjana, hence his alternate name of Anjaneyu, and his father was the wind god Vayu. FTP, name this figure who features prominently in the Ramayana, a monkey-god of Hindu myth.

ANSWER: Hanuman (accept Anjaneyu before it is mentioned)

Result: 2393 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 11 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 55662

Question: The Mudgala Purana lists eight incarnations of this deity who overcome eight demons. His other incarnations include one who slew Sindura, who was born from Brahma's yawn, and one with 10 arms who slew the demon brothers Davantaka and Narantaka. On one occasion he was appeased by a handful of rice after he threatened to eat Kubera. He won his consorts Siddhi and Buddhi by sitting down to read some scriptures during a race around the world. He allowed himself to be hit after recognizing a weapon created by his father during a confrontation with Parasu-Rama, and his refusal to budge from guarding his mother's bath resulted in his decapitation by his father. He also transcribed Vyasa's dictation of the Mahabharata. FTP name this son of Parvati and Shiva with a one-tusked elephant's head the Hindu god of wisdom

ANSWER: Ganesha

Result: 2394 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 11 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 55682

Question: The Mudgala Purana lists eight incarnations of this deity who overcome eight demons. His other incarnations include one who slew Sindura, who was born from Brahma's yawn, and one with 10 arms who slew the demon brothers Davantaka and Narantaka. On one occasion he was appeased by a handful of rice after he threatened to eat Kubera. He won his consorts Siddhi and Buddhi by sitting down to read some scriptures during a race around the world. He allowed himself to be hit after recognizing a weapon created by his father during a confrontation with Parasu-Rama, and his refusal to budge from guarding his mother's bath resulted in his decapitation by his father. He also transcribed Vyasa's dictation of the Mahabharata. FTP name this son of Parvati and Shiva with a one-tusked elephant's head the Hindu god of wisdom

ANSWER: Ganesha

Result: 2395 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 12 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 55712

Question: After Morrigan stole one of these from Odras, Morrigan turned Odras into a puddle, and Iti, the Egyptian god of music, was known as the one of confusion. Mnevis, the son of Ra, was one of these, and Androgeus was killed by one of these. After Gilgamesh spurned Ishtar, Anu sent pestilence to Uruk in the form of these creatures. The one of Memphis was Apis, and one of these animals was the mount of Shiva, Nandi. For 10 points, name this type of animal that Zeus turned into in order to rape Europa.

ANSWER: Bulls [I suppose all bulls are also cattle and so on, but prompt until they indicate it's a bull or a male cattle of some kind]

Result: 2396 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 13 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 55724

Question: In Germanic folklore, a giant named Lars Krands used one of these objects to transport sand that he then dumped on an offending farmer. In the Aeneid, Entellus uses one of these objects to kill a bull after defeating Dares in a contest. In the Mabinogion, Manawyddan uses one of these objects to store a captive mouse which he intends to hang for stealing grain from him. In Norse myth, one of these objects belonging to the giant Skrymir is mistaken by Thor for a house during a journey to the realm of Utgard-Loki. King Amycus, who attempted to impede the progress of the Argonauts before being defeated by Polydeuces, owned some of these objects that had spikes concealed in them, and Thor owned some iron examples of these objects, which were borrowed from the giantess Grith, and which he used to kill the giant Geirrod by throwing a piece of iron at him. For ten points, identify these objects, one of which had to be worn on Thor's right hand in order to wield Mjolnir and which might be useful to boxers.

ANSWER: gloves

Result: 2397 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 2 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 55515

Question: According to one tradition, this being's first incarnation was as the king Hiranyakashipu, where he went on to overthrow Indra and shut the gods out of heaven. However, his son Prahlada continued to worship Vishnu. For this, he tried to kill Prahlada but was unable to because of Vishnu's protection. This incarnation ended when Hiranyakashipu was killed by Vishnu. In another incarnation, this being appeared as the demon Sisupala. These two incarnations were part of a deal this being made with Vishnu in order so that he might return to heaven. This being was offered the choice whether to appear as seven incarnations as a friend of Vishnu, or three as an enemy. He chose the latter. As such, this being is most famous for his second incarnation under this scheme, where he appeared as the enemy of another avatar of Vishnu. Defeated largely through the efforts of the monkey god Hanuman, this was, FTP, what abducter of Sita who lived on the island of Lanka, ! the enemy of Rama?

ANSWER: Ravana

Result: 2398 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 2 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 55529

Question: This figure saved his grandson after Acastus stole his grandson's dagger, and his daughter was turned into a constellation by Artemis after she bore a daughter to Aeolus. This figure assisted in the marriage of Thetis, and he lived at the foot of Mount Pelion. The the father of Menalippe and the son of the Nymph Philyra and Cronus, he was accidentally shot by one of Heracles' poison arrows, and afterwards sacrificed his immortality for Prometheus. For 10 points, identify this tutor to Asclepius and Achilles, a noted Centaur.

ANSWER: Chiron

Result: 2399 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 3 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 55540

Question: In this mythological system, consultation of the war gods involved a feather standing straight up and whirling like a waterspout, while its god of sacrifice was known as "maggot mouth" and that god's tongue carries human bodies in its hollow. Hema's eyes are plucked out, prompting his two children to descend on a rainbow to avenge him, while another rainbow in this system marks a cave in which the virginity of a princess is protected by a giant lizard. Home to the Ku gods, as well as Kane and Kanaloa, one god in this myth system fights with his stepfather Olopana and is marked by bristles on his back, part of his association with the reef triggerfish. That god follows Kapo's detachable vagina, distracting him from his pursuit of a fire goddess who is the child of Haumea. For 10 points, name this mythological system, populated by the hog god Kamapua'a, as well as goddesses like Pele and Hina.

ANSWER: Hawaiian mythology (take Polynesian mythology until "Hema", prompt afterwards)

Result: 2400 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 4 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 55558

Question: Most modern scholars identify this figure with the title character of the Harbardsljod. This figure was given a drink by Agnar and placed between two fires for eight nights at the behest of King Geirroth while in the guise of Grimnis, and in another story, he forced Vafthrudnir to admit his inferiority. His halls include Gladsheim and Valaskjalf, the latter of which contains his throne Hlidskjalf. He spent a summer working for Baugi in order to seduce Gunnlod, from whom he obtained the Mead of Suttung. With Hoenir and Lodur, he created Ask and Embla, and with his brothers Vili and Ve, he created the world from the body of Ymir. For 10 points, identify this deity who learned the runes by hanging himself from Yggdrasil while pierced by his spear Gungnir, the one-eyed chief god of Norse myth

ANSWER: Odin [accept Grimnis until mentioned; also accept Woden or Wotanaz or all kinds of other ridiculous equivalents]

Result: 2401 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 5 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 55581

Question: One phase of this people's creation myth involves another god turning people created by Con into monkeys. The wife of this people's chief deity is seen as the patroness of fishermen, and the aforementioned primordial people were divided into ten separate communities by four brother-sister pairs who used a golden staff to emerge from caves to the Earth's surface. One god in this people's pantheon was allegedly appeased by people who tied up and starved black dogs, and this mythology's primordial flood only spared two brothers and their families and was caused by Paricia. Mama Occlo and Manco Capac founded the World Pole in this culture's pantheon, and its empire's capital is considered the "navel of the world". Drawing inspiration from the earlier Tiahuanaco culture, for 10 points, name this mythological system that venerates deities such as Mama Quilla, Inti, and Viracocha.

ANSWER: Incans

Result: 2402 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 6 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 55609

Question: During this, Savarbhanu was sliced in two by the discus Sudarshana, and Mohini played a part in a ruse following it. It resulted in the release of halahala, also known as Visha, and one figure gained the nickname Nilakantha during it. The ratnas it produced included the conch Shankha and Kamadhenu, a wish granting cow, and Allahbad, Ujjain, Nasik, and Hardwar served as hiding places after it. The form of Kurma was assumed by one figure during it, Mount Mandara was used to facilitate it, and after Vasuki vomited during it, Shiva swallowed the venom and obtained a blue throat. For 10 points name this event in Hindu mythology in which the gods extracted Amrita from a cosmic body of liquid.

ANSWER: Churning of the Milk Ocean

Result: 2403 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 7 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 55619

Question: She is described variously as the sister of daughter of King Aeetes of Colchis and one of her sons founded the city of Ardea while another ruled the Tyrsenoi, and Hesiod also mentions Anteias and Agrius as her sons. In one legend she fell in love with Glaucus and turned Scylla into a six headed monster and when Picas refused to relinquish his love for Canens, she turned him into a woodpecker.In the Argonautica, she purifies the Argonauts for their murder of Apsyrtus, the brother of Medea. This owner of the island of Aeaea and mother of Telegonus is stymied by one figure when he is given the antidote Moly by Hermes. For 10 points name this witch who turned a bunch of men into pigs and somehow had some seven children in the year she spent with Odysseus.

ANSWER: Circe

Result: 2404 | VCU Open | 2009 | Round: 9 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 55642

Question: One of these entities mediated a dispute regarding the city of Corinth between Poseidon and Helios, while Hesiod claims that one member of this group was goodly and married Poseidon's daughter, Kympoliea. In the Aeneid, Virgil compares Aeneas to one of these entities when the hero is in a rage against Turnus and his forces, although he claims these entities fought against Zeus. In the Iliad, Homer claims that Thetis recruited one of these entities to prevent the other gods from binding Zeus. Hated by their father, Uranus, who banished them to Tartarus, Hesiod writes that these entities were essential in Zeus' defeat of the Titans by throwing rocks down upon the enemy, then later serving as the Titans' guards in the underworld. FTP, name the collective name for Gyges, Cottus, and Briares, three big giants whose name stems from the fact that they supposedly had a hundred hands.

ANSWER: Hecatonchires (accept Centimani)

Result: 2405 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Andrew Hart.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 24137

Question: One realm associated with this figure is generally believed to be the planet Jupiter, and was called Nibiru. His chariot was drawn by four horses named Trampler, Haste, Pitiless, and Killer, and this figure's father led Mummu by a nose-rope just before his birth. He built a palace called Esharra, and his weapons include the Abuba, Imhullu, and a net that Anu gave him. This figure killed Kingu, whose blood Ninhursag used to create the first human. His father is a water deity called Ea, and he earned the Tablets of Destiny after killing a dragon that represented the sea. For 10 points, name this patron god of Babylon, the slayer of Tiamat.

ANSWER: Marduk [or Bel]

Result: 2406 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Brown.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 24157

Question: Pausanias claimed that this figure was raised by either Temenos or by the daughters of Asterion, and she was once seduced on the mountain of Thornax. She once sent a plague to ravage Aegina, after which the island's ants were turned into men. She also ordered Tethys to prevent Ursa Major and Minor from dropping below the horizon, as she held a grudge against Callisto. This cow-eyed deity also turned Lamia into a child-eating monster and ordered Argus to guard Io, and her children with her husband include Hebe and Ares. The peacock is sacred to, for 10 points, which daughter of Cronus and Rhea, the wife of Zeus and queen of the Greek gods?

ANSWER: Hera [accept Juno until, say, "Greek"]

Result: 2407 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Cornell.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 24203

Question: This figure's wife once sent a ring to his mother's handmaiden Fulla. Thor killed the dwarf Lit shortly after the giantess Hyrrokkin arrived to help with one of this god's possessions. He lived in the land of "fewest baneful runes," which is home to his hall Breidablik. He sent Draupnir back to Asgard with his brother Hermod, who'd been denied in his petition on this god's behalf by another god disguised as Thokk. This owner of Hringhorn, husband of Nanna, and father of Forseti was avenged by Vali after his death. For 10 points, identify this son of Odin and Frigg, who died after Loki tricked his blind brother Hoder into killing him with a mistletoe dart, the most beautiful of the Aesir.

ANSWER: Baldur [or Balder]

Result: 2408 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - EPHS.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 24245

Question: A Mayan example of these ate the heads of the men that Hurakan destroyed and was known as Camulatz. A three-legged one in Asian myths was variously known as Samjoko or Yatagarasu. One of these was the counterpart of Behemoth and Leviathan called Ziz. An Egyptian example of them rested on the benben pillar, and another assisted Prince Zal with the birth of Rostam. In addition to the Bennu and the Simurgh, other examples include the elephant-eating Roc and a group of part-brass ones that were the target of Heracles' sixth labor, the Stymphalian ones. For 10 points, name these creatures whose other mythical exemplars include the phoenix and Raven.

ANSWER: birds

Result: 2409 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Georgia A + Pitt B.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 24263

Question: He was once attacked and wounded by Parasurama, and in his incarnation as Vighnaraja, he rides the naga king Shesha. Garuda was once tasked with reacquiring an item this figure lost after being gazed upon by Sani. He is often depicted riding on a mouse, and the goad he holds in his upper right hand is used to remove obstacles from mankind. One story claims this figure married two women after he beat his brother Karttikeya in a race around the world. He was supposedly born from the dirt his mother wiped off of her leg while she was trying to take a bath in privacy from her husband. For 10 points, name this son of Shiva and Parvati, a Hindu god with the head of an elephant.

ANSWER: Lord Ganesha [accept Ganapati, Vinakaya, Lambodar, or Pillaiyar]

Result: 2410 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Harvard A + New College.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 24287

Question: The northlander Trendhorn got his eye put out by a chess piece when he was spying on this figure, while Fergus mac Roich was prevented by his geis from pursuing her. She was heard to cry out while still in her mother's womb, leading the druid Cathbad to prophesy that she would bring about the downfall of her house. Though she was the daughter of Feidlimid, the king decreed that she must be raised by Leabharcham, and she eventually fell in love with the brother of Ardan and Ainnle, Naoise mac Uisnech. For 10 points, identify this woman, who committed suicide after being recaptured by Conchobar mac Nessa, a Celtic figure whose beauty brought about much sadness.

ANSWER: Dierdre of the Sorrows [or Derdriu]

Result: 2411 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Harvard B.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 24293

Question: A text, supposedly by Robert of Torigny, tells of this character's "Rise," and notes that he once caused an embarrassing situation between Guenivere and Arthur when he pushed Arthur into the River Usk. This man accepts Gromer Somer Joure's challenge to figure out what women want in a story reminiscent of the Wife of Bath's Tale about his wedding to Dame Ragnelle. In another story, this character wears the symbol of a pentangle and rests at Lord Bertilak's castle, where his chastity is thrice tested, before setting out to bear the brunt of an axe-blow. For 10 points, name this knight of the Round Table, who got into a beheading contest with the Green Knight.

ANSWER: Sir Gawaine [accept Gwalchmei; Gawan; Gauvan; or Walewein]

Result: 2412 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Illinois B.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 24340

Question: This figure allegedly heard the cries of Stheno and Euryale and imitated them on a reed, thus inventing the flute. She sent a plague to strike the Locrians and sent the storm which killed Ajax the Lesser after he raped Cassandra in her temple, while Erichthonius was born after Hephaestus attempted to rape her. This goddess gave the gift of prophecy to Tiresias, who she had earlier blinded for seeing her naked. She turned Medusa into a Gorgon and, after losing a weaving contest, turned Arachne into a spider. For 10 points, identify this goddess of wisdom and daughter of Metis, born from the head of her father Zeus, who won a contest with Poseidon for control of her namesake city.

ANSWER: Pallas Athena [accept either; accept Athene, Asana, or Cydonia]

Result: 2413 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Missouri S&T + Dartmouth B.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 24343

Question: One character in this opera performs the "Csardas" to verify her disguise as a Hungarian countess before stealing her husband's watch to prove his infidelity, and earlier she convinces Alfred to pretend to be her husband and serve his eight-day sentence in jail. In the "laughing" song, "Mein Herr Marquis, ein Mann wie Sie," a maid convinces her master that she is actually an actress. While pretending to be Chevalier Chagrin, the jailer, Frank convinces Adele to come home with him where they find Rosalinde arguing with her husband. Falke leads the guests of Prince Orlofsky's ball to witness Baron Eisenstein's reconciliation, in, for 10 points, this operetta by Johann Strauss.

ANSWER: Die Fledermaus [or The Bat]

Result: 2414 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Missouri S&T + Dartmouth B.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 24344

Question: Late in his life this figure traveled to Sardinia with either Aristaeus or Iolaus after a stay in Sicily, where he helped King Cocalus and his daughters murder a visiting king. The father of the healer Iapyx, this figure fled Athens after the Areopagus condemned him to death for the murder of his nephew Perdix. He once used honey and an ant to thread a seashell, and he gave Pasiphae the wooden cow she used to mate with a bull, after which he built a structure to house their child. While imprisoned at the top of a tower, this man escaped with his son after building a pair of wings. For 10 points, identify this Greek inventor, the builder of the Minotaur's Labyrinth and the father of Icarus.

ANSWER: Daedalus [accept Daidalos; or Taitle]

Result: 2415 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Missouri S&T + Dartmouth B.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 24353

Question: When Jesus planned to return to Judea to visit Lazarus, this man persuaded the other apostles to go on the trip. This patron saint of architects has a feast day on July 3 which celebrates the transference of his body to Edessa in Mesopotamia. He was assured that Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life during the Last Supper, and late in his life he became the first Catholicos of the East while preaching in India. However, he earned his most famous nickname when he wanted to touch Christ's wounds for confirmation of his resurrection, after which he exclaimed, "My Lord and My God." For 10 points, name this apostle, best known for doubting the resurrection of Jesus.

ANSWER: Thomas the Apostle [accept Doubting Thomas, Didymus Thomas, or Judas Thomas]

Result: 2416 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Missouri.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 4766

Question: This figure once fended off an attack by the centaurs Hylaeus and Rhaecus, after which she was insulted by Eurypylus and Iphicles. This woman once made love in a temple of Cybele, which led to her and her husband being turned into lions. One of this figure's sons, a friend of Telephus, was one of the Seven against Thebes; that son was Parthenopaeus. When Althea's sisters attempted to take from her a fur she won for drawing first blood at a hunt, their nephew Meleager killed them. Later, this woman was distracted when Hippomenes threw three golden apples, causing her to lose a footrace. For 10 points, identify this only female Argonaut and hunter of the Calydonian Boar.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 2417 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - Penn + ULL.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 24409

Question: This figure's sons include Falka, Benig, and another that is met when a son of Gjulki meets Hjaalprek (he-YOLL-prek). In that story, one of the boldest of this figure's sons, Grani, refuses to serve Gunnar, and another story claims that he created the canyon Asbyrgi. Said to have runes carved on his teeth, this character's birth follows from a bet for the Sun, the Moon, and the hand of Freya in which Blast claims he can fortify Asgard in a single winter. To do so, Blast enlists the aid of this character's father to carry bricks a long way in an instant, and Loki mates with that animal, resulting in this figure's birth. For 10 points, name this son of Svadilfari, the eight-legged mount of Odin.

ANSWER: Sleipnir

Result: 2418 | ACF Fall | 2008 | Round: ACF Fall 2008 - UCLA A + Missouri State + J.S. Reynolds.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 24430

Question: This figure was a close analog of the wind god Ehecatl. Cihuacoatl aided him in grinding up the bones of older races to begin the fifth age of mankind, and this deity either disappeared on a raft of snakes or got exiled by his rival. He jumped onto a funeral pyre, causing his heart to become the morning star, after being tricked by Tezcatlipoca. Often conflated with the Mayan Kukulcan, this god's twin brother was the dog-headed skeletal psychopomp Xolotl (sho-LOT-tul), and he was the son of either Coatlicue by herself or Mixcoatl and Xochiquetzal (sho-chi-KET-zal). For 10 points, name this Atzec sky god, often depicted as a plumed serpent, not to be confused with Hernan Cortes.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl [accept Quetzalcohuatl; don't accept "Quetzalcoatlus" because that's a pterosaur]

Result: 2419 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Brown A | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 48226

Question: Among this goddess' children was the father of Ceyx; that man, Hesperus, was birthed after she kidnapped the husband of Procris. She also had a fling with Cleitus, the son of Mantius. With Astraeus, this figure gave birth to the four Anemoi, and in one story, Aphrodite killed Orion after this goddess took Orion to Delos. In her most famous story, she bore Memnon and Emathion after another god stole her cup-bearer; in exchange for Ganymede, she asked Zeus to give her lover eternal life, but forgot to ask for eternal youth, resulting in his turning into a grasshopper. For 10 points, name this lover of Tithonus, the Greek goddess of the dawn.

ANSWER: Eos [accept Aurora until "Aphrodite" is read and do not accept or prompt on it after]

Result: 2420 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Chicago A | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 48246

Question: Coyote gave his blanket to one of these known as Iya, and Papas masturbated on a goddess while she was disguised as one known as Agdos. In Hurrian myth, a gigantic one was placed on the shoulder of the dreaming god Upelluri, and in Irish myth, Oisin touched the ground and turned into an old man when he tried to pick up one of these. In Greco-Roman myth, some of these were defeated using a dove, per Phineas's advice, and the god Terminus was identified with these. The one known as Gjöll holds the chain binding Fenrir, and the ones known as the Sympleglades almost killed the Argonauts with their clashing. For 10 points, name these objects, also used to substitute for Zeus when Cronos tried to devour him, one of which features in the torment of Sisyphus.

ANSWER: rocks [or stones or boulders, etc]

Result: 2421 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Dartmouth A and B | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 48272

Question: This god's son was so disgusted with the food offered at a feast that he killed Uke Mochi, sparking a feud with a sibling that lived at Ise-Jingu. Another one of this man's children slayed Yamata-no-Orochi, an eight-headed serpent. This god lived at Ama-no-ukihashi, the floating bridge of the heaven, from where raised Onogoro from the ocean using Amenonuhoko, his magical spear. Much like Orpheus, this god travelled to the underworld to rescue his wife who had died in childbirth, but ultimately failed to bring her back. Giving birth to Tsukuyomi from his right eye and Amaterasu from his left eyes, for 10 points, name this Shinto god and consort of Izanami.

ANSWER: Izanagi

Result: 2422 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Extra Packet | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 48463

Question: One legend says that she is actually the daughter of Theseus and Helen and was rescued by Castor and Pollux. She was nearly blinded with a torch by her sister due to a misunderstanding as she returned home. Some accounts say that she landed on Zminthe and joined with Chryses to make war on King Thoas after stealing a statue. She was eventually summoned under the pretense of a marriage to Achilles and ended up in charge of sacrificing all strangers who entered Crimea before becoming immortal on the White Isle. Usually considered the sister of Elektra, she was spirited away to Tauris after Artemis provided an animal to take her place under Calchas's knife. For 10 points, name this daughter of Agamemnon who was to be sacrificed at Aulis to provide winds for the Greek fleet.

ANSWER: Iphigenia

Result: 2423 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Finals 1 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 48499

Question: A later attempt to capture this object led to the expedition of Isimud, who was struck by the person seeking it, and to the digging of an enormous hole by a turtle to trap the plotter. Those who held it gained the quality of melammu, or divine radiance, and could reverse the direction of time in order to return arrows to bows. Belet-Ili created a god for the purpose of retrieving this object from Anzu, a stormbird who had hidden it on a mountain in the desert. Eventually, Ninurta succeeded in shooting the bird and retrieved it for Enlil. Formerly possessed by Kingu, it was won by Marduk while killing Tiamat. For 10 points, name this collective object, a clay charm with legal formulae written on it which granted the bearer control of the universe in Babylonian myth.

ANSWER: the Tablets of Destiny [or Tablets of Destinies; or Tuppi Shimati]

Result: 2424 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Finals 2 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 48511

Question: One member of this race was a prophet who was killed by a Libyan snake while a member of the Argonauts, Mopsus. Another of their number was buried alive because he was formerly a female lover of Poseidon whom that god turned into an invulnerable transexual. In addition to Caeneus, they included Coronus, who was killed by Heracles in a war with the Dorians, and Leonteus, who led them at Troy. Another of them pushed Eioneus into a pit of fire and got busy with a cloud to produce a different group; that is the man bound to wheel by Zeus, Ixion. They also won a fight that began when their rivals tried to abduct Hippodamia at her wedding to Pirithous. For 10 points, name this people of Thessaly who defeated some boorish half-horses, the Centaurs.

ANSWER: Lapiths

Result: 2425 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Harvard | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 48539

Question: In one story, the maiden Apala prays to this god, and he cures Apala's father's baldness and makes Apala grow pubic hair. This god's wife thrusts against her man better than any other woman, which may explain why her loins were violated by Vrsakapi, this god's favorite monkey. That wife is a daughter of Puloman. When another god hides in the waters, this god joins Varuna's expedition to find him, and delivers a speech coaxing Agni to come out. When Hanuman attempted to catch the sun, this god struck him in the chin, leaving a permanent scar. Married to Sachi, he rides Airavata, a five-headed white elephant, and hurls the Vajra. For 10 points, name this Hindu thunder deity, the chief god of the Vedic pantheon.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 2426 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Harvard | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 48542

Question: In Lakota tradition, the god Cetan takes the form of this creature, and the human Waupee is transformed into one of these creatures. For the Aztecs, this creature was the messenger of the gods. The Arpads, the first royal dynasty of Hungary, claimed descent from one of these creatures named Turul. Egyptian deities with the head of this animal include an early necropolis god associated with the sed festival, Sokar. In Norse mythology, a cloak made from the sheddings of this animal is owned by Freya, and another of them is named Vedrfolnir and sits between the eyes of a related species above Yggdrasil. For 10 points, name this type of flying creature whose head looks just like the head of Horus.

ANSWER: falcon [accept hawk]

Result: 2427 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Illinois | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 48560

Question: In some sources, this goddess is used to fill in for Nerthus and is a patroness of harvests, and she is also equivalent to the Lapp goddess Ravdna. The mother of an archer-god, she is able to take the form of a swan. Once married to Orvandil, she is portrayed in one legend as a "man hating woman" by a god who tells her how she cuckolded her husband after being presented a cup of mead and suggested the seeking of a woman without fault. A wager which resulted from an assault upon this deity led to Eitri's awl being used in an attempt to sew shut the lips of another figure. Through her first husband, she bore the god of winter and skiing, and became the stepmother of Magni and Modi, before Loki cut off her hair. For 10 points, identify this deity whose golden hair was remade by dwarves who also forged Mjolnir and Gungnir, the wife of Thor.

ANSWER: Sif

Result: 2428 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Maryland A | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 48568

Question: The name "Cadmus" means one who is from here, and this direction was guarded by Jikoku in Shinto and symoblized by the Long dragon on the traitional Chinese compass. Tlaloc's sister Chalchiuhtlicue ruled this direction in Aztec myth, and Horus's son Duamutef also guarded it. This is the direction sacrificial fires to the gods face in Hinduism; one of Angrboda's functions in Norse myth was as patroness of the wind from here, while the Romans attributed the wind from this direction to Vulturnus, the equivalent of the Greek Eurus. Thyestes agreed to relinquish the throne to Atreus if the sun set in this unusual direction. For 10 points, name this cardinal direction, normally the start of Helios's daily journey.

ANSWER: east

Result: 2429 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Minnesota | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 48592

Question: A large one of these is the principal deity of the Ccoa people of Peru. A satire about these creatures by Senchán Torpéist led to their king, Írusán, kidnapping him, only to be killed by St. Ciarán. The Berachot says that the ground-up afterbirth of one can make demons visible, and a large one killed 180 warriors on the Isle of Anglesey and belonged to Palug. Another was represented by jars of ointment in hieroglyphs and was the mother of the "lord of the massacre," Maahes, while the footsteps of one were used in constructing Gleipnir. For 10 points, name this creature which pulled Freya's chariot and were the form taken by the Egyptian goddess Bast.

ANSWER: cats

Result: 2430 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Minnesota | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 48609

Question: Thirteen strings of pearls are said to dangle from his headdress, and his birthday on the ninth day of the first lunar month is celebrated as a holiday. He helped bring order to the universe as the apprentice of the highest of the Three Pure Ones, after which he spent 3200 aeons on the Mountain of Universal Light to achieve Golden Immortality, followed by a billion aeons contemplating his Holy Navel. His subordinates include the Ruler of the Eastern Peak, who owns the register of lives and reincarnations, and he notably assigned an antagonist to work in his stables and as the guardian of his peach garden. He also summoned twelve animals to his Palace of Abstractions; they later became the Zodiac. However, he was never able to completely pacify Monkey. For 10 points, identify this highest deity of Taoism, who takes his name from a precious stone.

ANSWER: the Jade Emperor [accept Yu Huang, Yu Di, or Tien Kung]

Result: 2431 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Rutgers-Letzler | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 48626

Question: This figure states, "Who cares to praise his enemy?" in Ovid's Metamorphoses and Homer refers to him as the "Gerenian horseman." This man states, "I seek no other vengeance than to ignore Heracles' mighty deeds" as Heracles killed his father Neleus as well as his brothers and sisters. Like many others, he was an Argonaut and participated in the Calydonian Boar hunt, but was better known for his role in the Trojan War, during which he led the Pylian troops and carried a solid gold shield. His son Antilochus is later killed by Memnon, and this man attempts to reconcile Agamemnon and Achilles. In the Odyssey, Telemachus is advised by Athena to visit this man after visiting Menelaus and Helen of Troy, who tells him of the fate of various Achaean leaders. For 10 points, name this king of a place often called "sandy," Pylos, who during the Trojan War, was too old to fight.

ANSWER: Nestor

Result: 2432 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Stanford | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 48646

Question: Some ancient sources say his father was not Zeus but rather a grandson of Deucalion, Aethlius. One of his daughters, Eurycyda, had a son with Poseidon named Eleius. His son beat Paeon in a race at Olympia, which meant Epeius became this man's successor while Paeon went into exile. Other sources say he was the father of Aetolus and Narcissus, though in the best-known myth involving him, this son of Calyce has 50 daughters. After a single kiss on Mount Latmos in his sleep, he is said to have begged Zeus for eternal youth and immortality. For 10 points, name this shepherd-king of Elis who was granted undying youth in eternal slumber, the beloved of Selene and subject of an epic poem by Keats.

ANSWER: Endymion

Result: 2433 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: UC-Irvine | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 48676

Question: One figure in this myth system was tricked into carrying a gigantic tree trunk into a hole, after which he turned his captors into the Pleiades. That figure was eventually killed by a mountain after being lured in with the promise of giant crab meat. A goddess in this culture was represented with a decomposed body hanging from a tree by a noose and was the patroness of suicide. At one point in the mythology of these people, a god sent a series of birds to break the bones of men, tear off their heads, and peck their eyes out before destroying humanity with a flood. In addition to Hurakan, these people believed in Hun Came, whose challenges at the Bat House to Hunahpu and Xbalanque are told in the Popul Vuh. For 10 points, name this group who worshipped Chac at Chichen Itza.

ANSWER: Mayans [or Quiche Mayans]

Result: 2434 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: UCLA | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 48688

Question: She formed the Milky Way when she spilled her breast-milk following the discovery of surreptitious suckling, and she sent Side (SEE-day) to the underworld for being as beautiful as she was. According to Pausanias, she is worshipped at Stymphalus as a widow. She was courted at Mount Thornax, after being brought up by the Seasons and Temenus. She bathed at the spring of Canathus to renew her virginity, and she took pity on her lover, who came to her in the form of a cuckoo. She was hung with a golden bracelet after Briareus rescued her husband from a hundred knots. Her contact with lettuces and flowers led to the birth of her children Hebe, Eris, and Ares. She also had Jason carry her across a river, and tried to foil Heracles. For 10 points, name this daughter of Rhea and Cronus, the goddess of marriage and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera

Result: 2435 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Vandy-Maryland B | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 48729

Question: A story from Winnebago myth concerns how Hare acquired one of these objects, while in Egyptian myth, two of these objects crossed represented the female form of Ka, Hemsut, as well as the cult of the goddess Neith. In the Mahabarata, Bhishma lies on a bed of these until the war is over, and upon the death of Heracles, those belonging to him were given to Philoctetes. Fourteen of them were used to punish Niobe, who had insulted Leto. In Norse myth, Hoder made one out of mistletoe. For 10 points, name these objects that were the undoing of Hoder and Achilles, used to inflict death or plague by Apollo and Artemis or to incite love by Cupid.

ANSWER: arrows

Result: 2436 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Vandy-Maryland B | Question: 24 | Mythology | NoneID: 48746

Question: His love of the satyr Ampelos, who was killed by the river Pactolus, resulted in the creation of one of the things most associated with him. In one story, when King Lycurgus learned that this god was in his kingdom, he imprisoned the followers of him, which resulted in the god's fleeing to Thetis. He then made Lycurgus go insane, thinking his son was some ivy, a plant holy to this god, which in turn made the land go bare until Lycurgus was drawn and quartered by his rebelling people. In another famous case of regal hostility towards this god, who was worshipped by the maenads, his own cousin is eventually raped and torn to pieces by a group of women including his mother, Agave, after Pentheus is driven to the wilds following his forbidding of this god's worship in a story used for a play by Euripedes. For 10 points, this son of a woman who died when she saw Zeus in his full splendor, Semele, the Greek god of inspired madness and wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus [accept Bacchus before "Zeus" is read and do not accept or prompt on it after]

Result: 2437 | ACF Nationals | 2008 | Round: Zeke | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 48749

Question: According to Pausanias they may have come from the Arabian Desert, and may have guarded the Amazons' shrine to Ares in the Black Sea. They had come to Arcadia in order to escape an invasion of wolves and had ruined crops in and around their namesake area. They were allowed to run roughshod until Phyleus was put on the throne in Elis. However, they had settled in dense forest, so, in order to lure them into the open, a certain hero had to climb a near by mountain and use a pair of bronze krotala, or clappers, provided by Hephaestus. The noise made by this instrument caused these brass-winged creatures to take to the sky where they were summarily shot down by a son of Zeus. For 10 points, identify these man-eating avians that were the subject of Hercules' sixth labor.

ANSWER: the Stymphalian birds

Result: 2438 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Amherst and South Carolina | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 44749

Question: One named Nomia fell in love with Daphnis and blinded him for his infidelity, and Helios mated with one named Aegle to produce the Charites. Ones assigned to Hades were called Avernales, and a group in Bithynia lured Hylas into either death or everlasting bliss. Their subclasses included Crinaeae, Pegaeae, Eleionomae, Potameides, and Limnades, and Melite of the Aegaeus River had a liaison with Heracles that produced Hyllus. Located in bodies of freshwater, they were the counterparts of the Nereids and Oceanids. For 10 points, name this other group of mythological Greek water nymphs.

ANSWER: Naiads

Result: 2439 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Amherst and South Carolina | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 44750

Question: After using an early microscope to discover the "two germs," this man oversaw a three-step process which took four hundred years to produce yellow and red. His activities were exposed by the Mahdi in 1930, some millenia after this man and 59,999 of his followers were exiled by the King of Mecca to the island of Pelan in the Aegean. There, he used a process of "grafting" to selectively breed for evil over a 600-year period. The scripture Message to the Blackman in America by Wallace Fard describes this figure's corruption of the Original Man and creation of a race of devils. For 10 points, name this figure from Nation of Islam theology, the inventor of white people.

ANSWER: Doctor Yakub

Result: 2440 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Brown A | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 45206

Question: He killed the demon Puloman and married that figure's daughter. He aborted Diti's fetus and broke it into forty-nine parts, and each piece grew into the Maruts. He makes his home in Svarga, and in one story he learns that every previous holder of his name has been turned into an ant. After he is caught having an affair with Ahalya, Maharishi cursed him with vaginas all over his body. In preparation for a battle, he drank a huge amount of soma and destroyed ninety-nine different fortresses; he fought in order to restore water to the world. He rides on the back of the white elephant named Airavata, and he wields the thunderbolt Vajra. For 10 points, name this Vedic god of thunder.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 2441 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Columbia and Temple | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 45724

Question: Narcissus gave one to Amenias to make him go away, while Aegeus left one of these and a pair of sandals for Theseus when he left his mother. Another one is made from a thread from the cloak of the Virgin Mary, a tooth of St. Peter, a hair of St. Denys, and a drop of St. Basil's blood. Freyr's unnamed one can rain fire onto the world without any action on his part. Sigurd's is named Gram, though the Nibelungenlied renames its Balmung and Wagner further renamed it Nothung. Another one is is returned by Bedyvere to the Lady of the Lake, and is usually considered distinct from the one in the stone. For 10 points, name these pointy weapons, which include Excalibur.

ANSWER: swords

Result: 2442 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Darmouth B and Illinois B | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 46044

Question: According to Homer, Anteia, the queen of Argos, tried to seduce him, and after his fall from grace, he wandered the Aleian plain. He was the cousin of Melampus, and King Iobates was asked by his son-in-law to have this figure put to death, but his attempt was thwarted by the advice of the wisest man in Lycia. The son of Poseidon by Eurynome, he was told by Polyeidus to spend a night at one of Athena's altars, and when doing so he dreamed he was given a golden bridle. His fame went to his head, and when attempting to ride up Mount Olympus, he was bucked off. For 10 points, identify this tamer of Pegasus and slayer of the Chimera.

ANSWER: Bellerophon

Result: 2443 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Darmouth B and Illinois B | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 46063

Question: This figure's daughter participates in the "stretching the cord" ritual and is responsible for tracking the regnal dates of kings He holds power over Renenet and Shai, or Fortune and Fate, and he is sometimes considered syncretized with a youthful moon god who has a cobra on his head, Khonsu. He questions the dead before Ma'at weighs the heart, and is sometimes associated with baboons. Worshipped at Hermopolis, he was responsible for writing and the moon. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god who became known to later Greeks as Hermes Trismegestus and had an ibis head.

ANSWER: Thoth [or Djehuty]

Result: 2444 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Dartmouth A | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 45806

Question: In Ovid's Metamorphoses, Telethusa prays to this goddess to change the gender of her dauthger so that she could marry the maiden Ianthe. By creating a snake from a fellow god's spit and mud, she was able to trick that god into giving her power over life and death. She was magically impregnated with a penis made out of gold and wax because her husband lost his real one when he was chopped into fourteen pieces. Like Hathor, she is sometimes depicted with a cow's head, but is more often pictured with her son, Horus. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, whose name means "woman of the throne," the wife of Osiris

ANSWER: Isis

Result: 2445 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Editors 1 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 47271

Question: In one story, he slings a rock at a princess disguised as a swan, but saves her and gives her to his foster-son. After that princess is murdered, he kills the women responsible, and other murderous deeds include killing his own son by the warrior woman Aife, and killing a sorcerer who had earlier judged him the winner of Bricriu's challenge after offering his head. This son of Deichtire raided Forgall's castle to get his wife Emer and was originally named Setanta before killing a large dog. In another tale, his father Lugh gives him some aid in defeating the Morrigan and the army of Queen Maeve in "The Cattle Raid of Cooley." For 10 points, name this Irish hero from the Ulster Cycle.

ANSWER: Cuchulainn [or Cú Chulainn; or Cú Chulaind; or Cuchulinn; accept Setanta before read]

Result: 2446 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Editors 2 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 47305

Question: In Shinto, a well on Fujiyama gaurded by Sengen bestowed this property. One place where everyone had this quality forbade inhabitants from touching the soil of Ireland, lest they never return, and is ruled by Niamh in Celtic myth; that place, "Tir na Nog," is named for this property. A son of Olvaldi once caused the Norse gods to stop having this property by stealing Idunn's golden apples. This property was notably not given to a son of Laomedon who founded Susa in Ethiopia after running off with Eos. For 10 points, Tithonus turned into a cicada because he was granted eternal life, but not what useful complementary property?

ANSWER: eternal youth [accept obvious equivalents]

Result: 2447 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Illinois A | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 47435

Question: After conceiving the moon god with his consort, whom he was accused of raping, he fathered three gods to take the place of that moon god, Suen, in the underworld. Often depicted with a crown of horns, he holds the Tablets of Destiny which give him control over the affairs of man. According to one Sumerian myth, he separated the Earth from the sky and then created mankind by breaking the Earth with his hoe. In another myth, he attempted to rid the Earth of mankind by plague and ultimately a great flood, about which Enki warned mankind. For 10 points, identify this deity whose consort is Ninlil and who is the Sumerian god of air and wind.

ANSWER: Enlil

Result: 2448 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Irvine | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 47457

Question: The Hawaiian equivalents to these creatures are the Menehune, while the Chilean one is said to be able to impregnate women just by looking at them. One of these creatures, Telesforos, is said to be the brother of Hygieia, and others include the king of the Yakshas, Kubera, and the fifth avatar of Vishnu, Vamana. However, they are most prominent in northern European myth, where they live in Nidavellir and count among their number Alvis, whom Thor turned to stone, Andvari, the original owner of the Rheingold, and the smiths Brokk and Eitri. For 10 points, name these little people who accordingly to popular folklore live in caves and operate mines.

ANSWER: dwarves

Result: 2449 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Maryland | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 47620

Question: In some myths, Dionysus earned a spot among the Olympians after getting this god drunk and transporting him to Olympus on the back of a mule in order to release Hera from a magic throne. Erechtheus, a legendary king of Athens, is said to have been produced by this god's abortive attempt at having sex with Athena and sprung from this god's spilt seed. In the Iliad, he is married to Aglaea, one of the Charities, while his better known partner was caught in a net with Ares and hauled before the rest of the Olympians. The parthenogenic son of Hera, identify, for 10 points, this lame husband of Aphrodite, the Greek god of volcanoes, the forge and fire.

ANSWER: Hephaestus

Result: 2450 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Maryland | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 47634

Question: In some versions of Tibetan Buddhism, this figure guards the southeastern direction as one of eight lokopala, spirits and deities assigned to watch over a specific direction. In some scriptures, this figure rides in a grand chariot pulled by parrots, but is more commonly cited as being pulled by goats or by riding his mount, a ram. One of his alternate names is 'Saptajihva' and refers to his actions in using his seven tongues to lick up a sacrificial offering of butter. This god was born of friction by using a namesake drill, a device that is used in his worship to create pyres. Immortal from his torches being lit everyday, fro 10 points, identify this Vedic and Hindu deity of fire.

ANSWER: Agni

Result: 2451 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: MIT A | Question: 23 | Mythology | NoneID: 47484

Question: While enslaved by Queen Omphale of Lydia, he was forced to dress up as a woman and do women's chores, though he eventually ended his bondage and married her. King Thespius asked this man to impregnate all fifty of his daughters, which he did in one night. This man made an agreement to help Laomedon kill a sea monster in exchange for the magic horses given to Laomedon by Zeus, but when Laomedon reneged, this man killed Laomedon and all his sons except Priam. His affair with Iole led his third wife Deianira to kill him by mistake. After he died, he married Hebe. For 10 points, name this hero who went mad and killed Megara, resulting in his twelve labours.

ANSWER: Heracles [accept Hercules before "Zeus" is read; do not accept or prompt on Hercules afterwards]

Result: 2452 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: MIT B and Oklahoma State A | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 47600

Question: According to Cherokee mythology, this figure's name is Selu, which translates as "corn," who is married to Kanati, "the lucky hunter." To Australia's Gunwinggu people, this person Waramurungundi. The Maori variously assign this role to Hine-ahu-one ir Marikoriko, and say that this person was formed from a dirt-covered pool. The Greek holder of this title was formed from clay by the gods, wed to Epimetheus, and given a box. For 10 points, Pandora shares what distinction with Lilith in being the premiere example of a certain class of person?

ANSWER: first woman [accept obvious equivalents]

Result: 2453 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: South Florida | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 47659

Question: Much of this deity's actions are recorded in the Markandeya Purana. Inducing the long slumber of Vishnu, Brahma must sing to this deity in order for Vishu to awake and slay some demons. In Buddhism she is represented by Tara and in Jainism, goddess Ambika. Her other aspects include that of a radiant dayini, in additio nto Radha, Draupadi, and Sita. She can also be a gracious boon provider in the form of Lakshmi and Parvati, or a destructive cosmic force manifested as Chamunda, Durga and Kali. For 10 points, name this female aspect of the divine in Hinduism.

ANSWER: Devi [accept Shakti prompt on Goddess]

Result: 2454 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Stanford A | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 47909

Question: Some of the medieval sources about this god may have plagiarized his tales from the Cycle of the Narts, an Ossetian epic which contains the very similar figure of Syrdon. He gave a gold-seeking ring to Hreidmar after stealing it from Andvari. In the Poetic Edda, this figure is invited to a feast given by Aegir, the sea god, but he loses his temper, kills a servant, and is driven off. The son of the giant Fárbauti, this figure who will be killed by Heimdall at Ragnarok himself fathered Hel. A giant with the ability to change shape at will, he uses his powers to give birth to Odin's horse, Sleipnir. For 10 points, name this husband of Sigyn and Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2455 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Texas | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 47915

Question: The Rudyard Kipling poem "Song of the Men's Side" pays homage to this deity, while another poem claims that he "is some token" that "holds troth well with athelings. " The Lokasenna suggests he had a consort, Zisa, whom Tacitus associated with Isis. This god's rune, an upward arrow, could partly explain his association with Mars. He also facilitated the Aesir's plan to make use of a powerful ribbon made out of a fish's breath and some other strange ingredients, Gleipner. For 10 points, name this Norse god of oaths and justice, who sacrificed his hand to restrain the Fenris Wolf, and who lends his name to the third day of the week.

ANSWER: Tyr

Result: 2456 | ACF Regionals | 2008 | Round: Wayne State | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 47974

Question: The possible wives of this figure include Euryanassa, daughter of the river god Pactolus, or Eurythemista, the daughter of the river god Xanthus, or Clytia; in any case, he had a deformed son named Broteas who became a great sculptor. He's the son of the nymph Pluto, who was married to Tmolus, and one story about him says that he had his friend Pandareus steal a golden dog from a shrine on Crete and then denied it, but was exposed by Hermes. His other children included Niobe and one he tried to chop up and serve to the gods, Pelops. For 10 points, name this king of Sipylos who was punished for his deeds by having food eternally out of his reach.

ANSWER: Tantalus

Result: 2457 | Chicago Open Literature | 2008 | Round: Packet_3.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 24570

Question: Their land includes the fountain Artacia. They work as much by night as day, allowing their members to make a dual living as shepherd and cattle-herder in their city of Telepylus, which was founded by Lamos and sits on top of steep cliffs overlooking a channel. At first seeing only smoke in their land, the protagonist sends out a search party, which is directed to their king, Antiphates, by his daughter. However, when that party instead encounters this race's violent queen, they retreat, and though the cove-hidden flagship remains safe from them, the rest of the fleet is destroyed by their hurled rocks. Visited between Aeolus and Circe, for 10 points, name this race of man-eating giants from the Odyssey.

ANSWER: the Laestrygonians [DL]

Result: 2458 | Chicago Open Literature | 2008 | Round: Packet_7.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 24649

Question: One character in this work founds the station of Nibir to determine the bounds of the year. Later, the Igigi wail in lamentation after Gaga describes how one character created monster-serpents made of poison to destroy them. This work describes the creation of E-sara by a character who uses an evil wind and a net to defeat his antagonist. In its third section, Ansar asks Lahmu and Lahamu to prepare a feast after learning that the antagonist exalted Kingu by giving him the Tablets of Destiny. It begins with Apsu provoking his wife to wage war against the gods, which causes Tiamat to be slain by Marduk. Meaning "when on high," FTP, name this creation myth of Babylonian mythology.

ANSWER: Enuma Elish [JM]

Result: 2459 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 1 - Vandy 1.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 24733

Question: He outsmarted his brother Karttikeya to marry Buddhi and Siddhi, personifications of wisdom and prudence. He is usually shown carrying a mace, discus, shell, and water lily, and he was the scribe to whom Vyasa dictated the Mahabharata. He rides a rat, and one version of how he got his most distinctive feature involves his uncle Sani just looking at him, while another version has him guarding the bath of his mother Parvati and angering his father Shiva. For 10 points, name this Hindu god, the remover of obstacles who had his head replaced by that of an elephant.

ANSWER: Ganesha

Result: 2460 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 11 - UMN 4.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 24769

Question: He once conspired with Hera and Athena to put Zeus in chains; later, he killed the giant Polybotes with an island. Some stories claim that he was raised by the Telchines or hidden in a flock of sheep by Arne at the request of Rhea instead of suffering the fate of most of his siblings. He sent a monster to attack Troy after Laomedon failed to reward him for helping Apollo build walls, and later sent another monster to devour Laocoon. His horse lost to Athena's olive tree in the contest for Athens, his children include Polyphemus and Triton, and his wife is Amphitrite. For 10 points, identify this brother of Hades and trident-wielder, the Greek god of horses and the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 2461 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 11 - UMN 4.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 24774

Question: In Romanian myth, Ilena Consanzeana dives into the sea and eventually turns into the moon in order to avoid this action. Shiva cuts off one of Brahma's heads after doing this action under the influence of one of Kama's arrows. Smyrna was transformed into a myrrh tree by her partner in this action. Two survivors of Sodom and Gomorrah got Lot drunk in order to undertake this action, and Papa Earth and Rangi Sky created mankind through this action. For 10 points, identify this action that created Mordred from Morgause and Arthur and Horus from siblings Isis and Osiris, reproduction that occurs between family members.

ANSWER: Incest

Result: 2462 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 12 - UMD 4.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 24794

Question: He took all of the fingers and all but one of the toes from Mafuike, and was entreated to do one of his greatest feats because of his mother's lack of time to dry tapa.

ANSWER: Maui-tikitiki

Result: 2463 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 3 - Vandy 2.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 24835

Question: This man went with Diomedes to retrieve the bow of Philoctetes. Earlier, he made Palamedes look like a traitor after Palamedes revealed that he was feigning madness to avoid military service. He received a bag of winds from Aeolus which his men released, and tricked Polyphemus by adopting the name Nobody. Meanwhile, his son Telemachus was trying to ward off suitors for Penelope. For 10 points, name this hero of the Trojan War who underwent a ten-year journey to return home in a namesake epic by Homer.

ANSWER: Odysseus [or Ulysses]

Result: 2464 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 6 - UMD 2.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 24880

Question: He supposedly lives atop Mount Kailash, which out of deference for those religious beliefs, if off-limits to climbers. Usually worshipped symbolically as a Lingam, he is also depicted either in deep meditation or as the lord of the dance, doing the Tandava to fuel the cycle of creation, preservation and destruction as the Nataraja. His mount, the white bull Nandi, cursed Ravana while his consort, Parvati, the reincarnation of Sita, is the mother of Skanda and Ganesha. The member of the Hindu trinity from whose hair the Ganges flows, identify, for 10 points, this blue-throated destroyer god and counterpart to Brahma and Vishnu.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 2465 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 6 - UMD 2.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 24885

Question: In some myths, this god would have taken the nymph Minthe as a mistress if his current wife had not transformed her into the mint plant. To the Romans, this god was known as either Orcus or Dispater and was said to reside in the realm of Erebus, another name for this god. This god is best known in myth for his kidnapping of Demeter's daughter, Persephone causing the changes in seasons. The owner of the three-headed dog Cerberus, for 10 points, identify this Greek god of wealth, the dead and the underworld.

ANSWER: Hades

Result: 2466 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 7 - UMN 1.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 24910

Question: In one text, this man is described as an exile from Troy, leading to Thor Heyerdahl's work "The Search for" this man. In Saxo Grammaticus's Gautrek's Saga, King Vikar draws the short straw and is sacrificed to this god for favorable winds. He can see all from his thrown of Hlidskjald, and two of his palaces are Gladsheim and Valaskjalf. Along with his brother Vili and Vi, he slaughtered Ymir and fashioned his body into the earth. For 10 points, name this "all father," the husband of Frigg and master of the ravens Hugin and Munin, the head of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin or Woden

Result: 2467 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 8 - UMD 3.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 24928

Question: In their pantheon, the Bacabs were a group of four gods who held up the sky while Tepeu was one of the gods associated with their creation.

ANSWER: Maya

Result: 2468 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 8 - UMD 3.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 24935

Question: This dedicatee of the Battle of the Ten Kings married the daughter of Puloman, and suffered Ahalya's curse. Attended by the Maruts, he currently watches the dance of the Apsaras and Gandharvas on Mount Meru, and destroyed the Vala, freeing a bunch of cows. He is lord of Svargaloka and, with Agni, leader of the Devas. In his most famous endeavor, he liberated the waters in the Rig Veda after slaying Vritra while intoxicated with Soma. FTP, identify this lightning-wielding war god from Hinduism, whose status as chief deity was somewhat supplanted by the rise of Vishnu, Brahma, and Shiva.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 2469 | Chitin | 2008 | Round: Round 9 - UMN 2.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 24942

Question: This figure instituted such festivals as the Oschophoria and the Pyanepsia during his rule, which he gained after slaying the sons of Pallas. During a visit to the underworld, his friend Pirithous became stuck to a chair. He slew the Crommyonian sow, as well as a variety of jerks including Sciron, Periphetes, Sinis, and Procrustes, after finding his father Aegeus's sword and sandals. He went to Crete as part of an offering of 14 youths, and mastered the labyrinth with the help of Ariadne, who he later left on Naxos. For 10 points, identify this father of Hippolytus, King of Athens, and slayer of the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 2470 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 1 | Question: 26 | Mythology | NoneID: 55764

Question: A constant companion of this god makes characteristic scratch marks on trees. Along with a similar figure who carries a big bag everywhere, this god was captured by a thirty-three member army and forced to stop being an (*) evil demon. He is usually shown with the set of drums he uses and is large and red-skinned. He also enjoys collecting human navels. For 10 points name this god of thunder in Shinto.

ANSWER: Raiden or Raijin

Result: 2471 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 10 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 56116

Question: The place they stay in is sometimes called the Holt or the Laradr, and they are able to survive by eating only morning dew. Until they can see sunlight again, they will sleep in (*) Hodmimir's Forest, where they are protected from the fires of Surt. At the end of the cataclysm, these people whose names mean "life" and "eager for life" repopulate the Earth. For 10 points name this pair that survives Ragnarok.

ANSWER: Lif and Lifthrasir

Result: 2472 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 11 | Question: 25 | Mythology | NoneID: 57924

Question: When they landed in the Bebrycian land, one of their number killed a song of Melie who forced people to box, Amycus. That endeared them to Lycus of Mariandynia. King (*) Aeetes chased them out of Colchis, and this group encountered both the Sirens and the Harpies. For 10 points identify these people, including Polydeuces and Heracles, who used a namesake ship to find the Golden Fleece and were led by Jason.

ANSWER: Argonauts

Result: 2473 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 12 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 59070

Question: This figure's mother uses a magic stick to fish, and her father had a magic seashell that could turn into a boat of any size. Many craters were created by digging in different proposed spots for the house of this daughter of (*) Haumea and Kane Milohai. For 10 points name this goddess who caused the eruptions of Kilauea with her anger, the fire, lightning, and volcano patron in Polynesian myth.

ANSWER: Pele

Result: 2474 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 13 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 59123

Question: Some say the Gorgons lived near Lake Tritonis in this land, where Euphemus was given some magic dirt that turned into a woman. It is also the name of a woman who produced Lelex, Belus and Agenor with (*) Poseidon. Apollo carried a woman who was wrestling with a lion here, which is how the city of Cyrene was named. For 10 points name this land where Heracles killed Antaeus, the namesake of a modern African country.

ANSWER: Libya

Result: 2475 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 14 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 59186

Question: The sons of this group, such as Promacus and Biantes, later caused the Battle of Glisas and installed Thersander as a king. Those sons are known as the (*) Epigoni. One of these people ate Melanippus's brain, causing Athena to withhold immortality from him. They were led by a man who possessed the robe and necklace of Harmonia. For 10 points name this group commanded by Polynices which fought for the throne once held by Oedipus.

ANSWER: the Seven Against Thebes

Result: 2476 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 15 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 59221

Question: This god slept successively with Amma, Edda, and Modir, thus creating Thrall, Karl, and Jarl, the progenitors of the three races of men, in his guise of Rig. Sometimes called the grandson of Geirrendour the Giant, he lives at the Cliff of Heaven, has (*) golden teeth, and carries the Gjallar horn. Said to be the son of nine mothers, he can hear wool growing on sheep. For 10 points name this guardian of Bifrost

ANSWER: Heimdall (accept Rig before it is read)

Result: 2477 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 16 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 59456

Question: This goddess was a fan of food-based punishments, as she made Erysichthon eat himself and gave Triopas an insatiable hunger for stealing the roof from one of her temples. Nursed by Peace, she taught an important skill to Triptolemus, and this subject of the (*) Eleusinian Mysteries once boycotted Olympus due to a situation involving her daughter's pomegranate consumption. For 10 points name this mother of the kidnapped Persephone.

ANSWER: Demeter

Result: 2478 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 17 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 59488

Question: Sometimes called the "lord of red steeds," this consort of Svaha is responsible for digesting food and holding up heaven with a column. This god has a chariot that is pulled by (*) parrots, and serves priestly functions within the pantheon. Eight books of the Rig Veda open with prayers to this god, is depicted with seven tongues and two faces, covered in ghee. For 10 points name this Vedic god of fire.

ANSWER: Agni

Result: 2479 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 18 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 59513

Question: This god was able to shrink in size in order to pass through the spokes of a spinning wheel. This figure's mother once sold herself into slavery after losing a bet over the color of a horse, so this figure had to go to Patala with a cup of (*) amrita to free her. He was told not to eat Brahmins before being let loose to chow down on evildoers after being born to Kashyap and Vinata. For 10 points name this king of birds and mount of Vishnu.

ANSWER: Garuda

Result: 2480 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 2 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 55768

Question: The green tiger Yaguarogui does this in Bolivian myth, while the Ainu claim that Kamui sent a heroic crow to prevent a devil from doing this. Rahu and Ketu try to do this in Hinduism, and Nut does this on a (*) nightly basis in Egyptian myth. One of the events that will kick off Ragnarok is Skoll doing this. For 10 points name this activity which Chinese myth believes dragons engage in to cause eclipses.

ANSWER: eating the sun (accept clear equivalents; prompt on destroying the sun or similar answers)

Result: 2481 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 3 | Question: 22 | Mythology | NoneID: 55812

Question: This figure, who turned the peasants of Lycia into frogs, had a sister, Asteria, who was turned into the island of Ortygia. Along with the waves of Delos, that allowed her to find a place without sunshine to give birth. A massacre on Mount Cithaeron and fatal (*) arrows from this Titan's huntress daughter resulted from a putdown towards this deity by Niobe. For 10 points name this mother of Apollo and Artemis.

ANSWER: Leto

Result: 2482 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 4 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 55953

Question: One component of this large work was the original source for Gawain and the Green Knight. In addition to Bricriu's Feast, it also contains the Yellow Book of Lecan. The story of (*) Noisi and Deirdre is in one section, and the attacks of Connaught under Queen Medb are described in The Cattle Raid of Cooley. For 10 points name this mythical cycle which tells of the Knights of the Red Branch, led by Cu Chulainn.

ANSWER: Ulster cycle (or Uliad cycle) this

Result: 2483 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 5 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 55992

Question: The inhabitants of the Kalahari believe that Kaang used one of these to fashion the moon. People who sell the straw kind of them are protected by Liu Bei, one of the Three Musketeers of China, and the Dutch folk character (*) Zwarte Piet places candy into these objects. Skadi invented the type used on snow, while Vidar incapacitates Fenrir using the "thickmost" one. For 10 points name these leather clothing articles.

ANSWER: shoes

Result: 2484 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 6 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 56002

Question: Perhaps originally a god of the Tiwanaku, he used stone for his second creation and dispersed mankind in four directions. He walked onto the ocean at Manta and is sometimes held to have gone all the way to Polynesia under the name (*) Kon-Tiki. Through his son Inti and daughter Mama Quilla, he was the ancestor of Manco Capac and thus all of the Inca. For 10 points name this sun and creator god.

ANSWER: Viracocha

Result: 2485 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 7 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 56026

Question: The pagan Teutons worshipped a figure of this position at the "column of the world," and Romans honored one of them at the Equirria. In China, he is the deified form of a curd salesman and waves around a copy of the Spring and Autumn Annals, and the (*) Vedic one, who also has weather functions, leads the Maruts. The Norse one sacrificed his hand to bind Fenrir. For 10 points name this role filled by Indra, Tyr, and Ares.

ANSWER: gods of war

Result: 2486 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 8 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 56054

Question: He changed prison cells in Phylace, where he helped Iphiclus conceive an heir. This figure also discovered the need to remove a rusty knife from a tree, and his brother had to retrieve the cattle of (*) Phylacus in order to marry Pero. He helped Bias perform that task after earning both himself and Bias a third of Pylos through some secrets vultures told him. For 10 points name this Greek prophet who could understand animals.

ANSWER: Melampus

Result: 2487 | FICHTE | 2008 | Round: 9 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 56090

Question: This man's son became the tragic lover of Morgause. Sometimes called the brother of the Fisher King, he is eventually killed by Gaheris and Gawain as revenge for his killing of Lot. It is while fighting him that Arthur (*) breaks his sword and receives the replacement Exclaibur. For 10 points name this father of Lamorak who pursues the Questing Beast and is perhaps best known as the father of Percival.

ANSWER: Pellinore

Result: 2488 | Gaddis I | 2008 | Round: Gaddis - Round 10.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 24984

Question: Ivaldi gave this figure the mead reserve Byrgir in order to marry his granddaughter Gunnlod. This father of Suttung created the primordial cow Audhumla to nourish Ymir, and this husband of Sinmore later uses the sword Gambantein to kill a god who fights him with a stag's antler. The land he guards was the source of the planets and stars, and mixed with Niflheim in order to create life. His name means "black," and this guardian of ? Muspellheim will kill Freyr at Ragnarok before burning the nine worlds. FTP, identify this fire giant from Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Surtr (3)

Result: 2489 | Gaddis I | 2008 | Round: Gaddis - Round 2.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 25008

Question: This man died after drinking from a poisoned spring at Verulamium after defeating a Saxon force led by Octa. He killed King Pasgen at the Battle of Mynyw, and according to Geoffrey of Monmouth, this man transported the Giant's Ring to Britain as a memorial to the chieftains killed at the Night of the Long Knives. Along with his brother, Aurelius Ambrosius, this man led a rebellion against Vortigern. He infiltrated Tintagel Castle while enchanted to look like Gorlois in order to impregnate ? Igraine, and received his nickname when he saw a comet shaped like a fire-breathing monster. FTP, identify this British king, the father of King Arthur.

ANSWER: Uther Pendragon (3)

Result: 2490 | Gaddis I | 2008 | Round: Gaddis - Round 3.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 25025

Question: In one story, this god turned into a tiny salamander and hid in water after his refusal to sacrifice himself prevented the sun from moving. In another story, this god kidnapped Xochiquetzal, made her eat forbidden fruit, and ravished her. Represented as either a skeleton or a man with a dog's head, this god of lightning guides the sun through the underworld every night, and takes the dead to ? Mictlan. The sibling of this god created a new race of humans by dropping his blood on the fragments of the bone of life. FTP, identify this psychopomp, the twin brother of Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Xolotl (4)

Result: 2491 | Gaddis I | 2008 | Round: Gaddis - Round 5.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 25077

Question: One of this deity's sons brought Etain to Midir out of gratitude, and fell in love with a woman in the form of a swan, Caer Ibormeith. This god killed Cridenbel by giving him food containing three gold coins, and assured his side's victory over the Fomorians in the Second Battle of Magh Turedh by sleeping with the Morrigan. This son of Danu and father of Angus mac Og owned a club which could kill nine men on one side and revive them with the other, a harp he used to control the seasons, and a magical cauldron that never ran out of food. FTP, identify this Celtic god of the earth, the leader of the ? Tuatha de Danann, whose name means "the good god."

ANSWER: the Dagda (4)

Result: 2492 | Gaddis I | 2008 | Round: Gaddis - Round 7.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 25120

Question: He fought a war with Euneus and received thereafter a portion of land he called Akesa. He died after allying with Rhodians, having established the cities of Petelia and Crimissa. Pylius, Podalirius, and Machaon are among men believed to have helped this man, who may have been beset during a sacrifice to Apollo Sminthius. This son of Demonassa and Poeas is sometimes said to have performed a task alternately attributed to Hyllus or Morsimus, receiving a gift after setting fire to a pile on Mount Oeta. Possibly punished for not returning the love of the nymph Chryse, ?

ANSWER: Philoctetes (3)

Result: 2493 | Gaddis I | 2008 | Round: Gaddis - Round 8.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 25134

Question: Ghentu, a god of one of these phenomena, is represented by a dunghill and is worshipped during the month of Phalguna. Devi Mata is responsible for these phenomena in the Punjab. Mari Bhavani represents one type of this phenomenon, and one deity of this phenomenon has projecting teeth, a hideous face, and carries a broom, a fan, and a sword. In Bengal, the goddess Sasthi helps worshipers escape these phenomena. One form of Matangi Sakti might control these phenomena with seven "Mothers." The most notable deity of these phenomena is Sitala, who brings with her a thing used on ? blankets to kill a different kind of Indian during Pontiac's Rebellion. FTP, name this very common phenomenon in India, manifested in things like itching, cholera, and smallpox.

ANSWER: disease [accept equivalents and accept itching until "Devi Mata"] (1)

Result: 2494 | Gaddis I | 2008 | Round: Gaddis - Round 9.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 25164

Question: This deity sliced open the mouth of the sea slug when it refused to swear loyalty to the gods. This deity was made the head of the Sarume Order after marrying Saruta-Hiko in order to aid the descent of Ninigi. According to the Kojiki, this goddess performed her most notable action next to a sakaki tree decorated with jewels. This goddess stood on an overturned tub and exposed her sacred genitals while performing a lewd, comic dance, which provoked so much laughter that another goddess was enticed to look into a mirror. For fifteen points, identify this Japanese goddess of mirth whose dancing caused Amaterasu to emerge from her cave.

ANSWER: Ame-no-Uzume no Mikoto (5)

Result: 2495 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Championship 01 FINISHED.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 25172

Question: In Hungarian folklore, the demon Ordog takes this form when in the underworld, though when on Earth he takes the form of a fox, and when Sigurd first wounds Fafnir, he claims to be this kind of creature. Four of these creatures dwell in the middle of Yggdrasil, while another of these creatures eats from the tree of laered and is named Eiktyrnir. That creature lives with Heidrun the goat on top of Valhalla. Artemis caused one hunter to be devoured by his own dogs by turning him into one of these creatures; that hunter was named Actaeon. The third labor of Hercules was to catch the Ceryneian variety of this animal. FTP, name this woodland creature whose young are called fauns.

ANSWER: deer (accept hart, stag, and other equivalents)

Result: 2496 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Championship 02 FINISHED.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 25191

Question: Among the challenges this man faced included the pirate Cheirmarrhus, and children of this man, who was born Hipponous, include Isander, Hippolochus, and Laodamia by his bride Philnoe. This man lived out his days crippled on the Plains of Aleion, and his grandson exchanged armor with Diomedes during the Trojan War. Punishment for his alleged seduction of Anteia included battling the Amazons and the Solymi. The seer Polyidus helped this man procure his most helpful asset, which was used to defeat a beast inhabiting Caria. FTP, name this son of Glaucus and part-time servant of Iobates, a Greek hero who slew the Chimera and tamed the winged hose Pegasus.

ANSWER: Bellerophon (accept Hipponous early)

Result: 2497 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Championship 02 FINISHED.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 25195

Question: One famous example of them ends when Kari avenges the death of his father, who was burned alive after his best friend Gunnar was outlawed. That one, known as "Njal's," contains a description of the coming of Christianity as well as detailed information on the workings of the Althing. The Laxdaela one focuses on the beautiful girl Gudrun, who is fought over by two brothers, while that of Egil Skallagrimsson might have been written by Snorri Sturluson. FTP, identify this literary form about battles, revenge, and Vikings that was popular in medieval Iceland.

ANSWER: sagas

Result: 2498 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 01.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 25224

Question: Some accounts say he was visited by his former lover's sister, Anna, who drowned while escaping his jealous second wife. He had earlier escaped peril with the help of the stranger Achaemenides despite that man's confession that he had been on Odysseus's crew. Only the intervention of the gods saved him from Diomedes, and in later war he defeated Turnus. Having descended through Avernus with the Cumaean Sibyl, he was instructed to "spare the vanquished" by the shade of his father, whom he had carried on his shoulders from their destroyed city. FTP, name this Trojan prince who spurned Dido to settle in Italy and found the Roman people, the subject of a work by Virgil.

ANSWER: Aeneas

Result: 2499 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 03.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 25249

Question: One of his five vyuhas is kidnapped by Bana, and after defeating the demon Mahabali he earns the title Trivikrama. He reclines on the serpent Ananta during the pralaya, and he wields a mace and the Sudarshana chakra. As Mohini, he steals the amrita from the asuras during the Churning of the Milk Ocean. This challenger of Bali and slayer of Hirankashipu warns King Manu of an imminent flood as Matsya, and he can also appear as a dwarf, a man-lion, a boar, a turtle, or a fish. FTP, name the Hindu preserver god who descends to Earth as ten avatars.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 2500 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 04.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 25264

Question: Sindri forged Gullinbursti and Draupnir in response to this god's bet that his friend Dvalin's gifts were unsurpassable, and the husband of Idunn offered him a sword, horse, and ring at a banquet. After he was found in the form of a salmon in Franang's Falls, he was bound by the entrails of his son Narfi as his wife Sigyn held a cup over him in punishment for fooling Hodr into throwing a sprig of mistletoe at his brother Baldr. The father with Angrboda of Hel and the wolf Fenrir, this is, FTP, what Norse trickster god?

ANSWER: Loki (do not accept "Utgard-Loki")

Result: 2501 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 06.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 25303

Question: One man with this title lost a war when Pandion II received aid from Tereus, while another was the uncle of Antiope. Another was unable to follow Labdacus because of the usurper Lycus. Upon that man's death, Niobe's husband, Amphion, took power with his twin Zethus. Besides that ruler, Laius, and one who sowed the earth with dragon's teeth, Cadmus, the most famous holder of this title guessed the sphinx's riddle and married his mother Jocasta. FTP, identify the distinction shared by all of these men, including Oedipus, who ruled a certain Greek city.

ANSWER: kings of Thebes

Result: 2502 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 07 ADV FINISHED.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 25329

Question: This figure plays a key role in the Haida creation myth, in which he frees men from a clam shell. Also known as He'maskas, Txamsem, Yehl, and Kwekwaxa'we, he brought the first berries and meat to humans, not to mention fresh water, fire, and stars. In Celtic mythology, this figure's form was assumed by Badb and the Morrigan. FTP, identify this Native American antagonist to Coyote, a trickster who took the Sun in his beak from Gray Eagle's tent, and who shares his name with the forms of Huginn and Muninn, who perch on Odin's shoulders, a pair of birds.

ANSWER: Raven

Result: 2503 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 07.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 25346

Question: This figure once had sixty diseases thrown at her by Namtar, but she was rescued by the eunuch Asu-shu-namir. One well-known story concerning this figure saw her descend through seven gates to the underworld, losing an article of clothing at each, where she confronted her sister Ereshkigal; during this time, all sexual activity ceased on earth. This daughter of Anu made an astral triangle with the sun and moon, Shamash and Sin, and had a sacred city at Erech. This lover of the god of the harvest, Tammuz, was rejected by Gilgamesh. Personifying the planet Venus and a counterpart to the Sumerian Innana, this is, FTP, what Babylonian goddess of fertility, love, and war?

ANSWER: Ishtar

Result: 2504 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 09 ADV FINISHED.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 4767

Question: This child of Clymene was perhaps a conglomeration of two entities and slew Rhoecus and Hyaelus before defeating Peleus in a wrestling match. Toxeus and Plexippus were insulted by this figure's reward during the resolution of Oeneus's curse, leading to the death of her beloved. Thereafter, she was reunited with her father Iasus, who disdained her emulation of her patron goddess, which led to her transformation into a lion. FTP, identify this huntress who was beaten, with Aphrodite's help, in a footrace by Melanion and his three golden apples.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 2505 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 09.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 25421

Question: Ovid told of Cephalus's kidnapping at the hands of this figure, who was spurned by Orion and also kidnapped Ganymede and Clitus. Her son Memnon of Ethiopia, was killed by Achilles in the Trojan War. Hesiod calls her the mother of the four winds by Astraeus, and she was the daughter of Theia and Hyperion. She begged for immortality for Memnon's father, Tithonus, but forgot to ask for eternal youth, so he aged into a grasshopper. Identified by Homer as "saffron-robed" and "rosy-fingered," this is, FTP, what titaness sister of Helios, the goddess of the dawn?

ANSWER: Aurora (accept Eos)

Result: 2506 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 10 ADV FINISHED.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 25449

Question: The Ogdoad placed him as the eye of Horus and a god of the moon, and his wife or daughter notched her palm to demarcate the length of a pharaoh's life and was called Seshat, though the goddess he is more often paired with is often depicted with the Shu on her head.

ANSWER: Thoth

Result: 2507 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 10.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 25465

Question: An earlier version of this god was depicted as a youth with a lock of hair, and was known as Heru-p-khart, while a later version of this god was a patron of Nekhen and a god of light, Heru-ur. He got his hands back after a clever invention of the crocodile god Sobek. He had a son named Ihy, and four of his sons protected the canopic jars, while this figure is sometimes called a son of Hathor. His eyes often represented the sun and the moon, and the eye of this figure who battled Set became a symbol of Egyptian power. Later replaced by the sun gods Ra and Aten, this was, FTP, what sky and war god, the falcon-headed son of Isis and Osiris?

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 2508 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 11 ADV FINISHED.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 25474

Question: At Kurukshetra, Arjuna flies a flag with this character on it, whose chin is scarred from where Indra hit him with his vajra, in an incident wherein he mistook the sun for a mango and tried to eat it. He wrote a version of the Ramayana on a mountain, then threw it into the sea when Valmiki seemed sorrowful. Rama says that he is as dear to him as Bharat after he, in search of an herb he cannot find, returns with the mountain where the herb must be. Cursed to only know his full power when others remind him, FTP, identify this son of Vayu, who, in the war against Ravana, led an army of monkeys.

ANSWER: Hanuman

Result: 2509 | HFT | 2008 | Round: HFT Round 11.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 25499

Question: His hall, Svarga, is the destination for dead warriors, and he is called Sakka in the Tipitaka, while in another tradition he is lord of the Vasus and thus called Vasava. He created a set of attendants for himself, the Maruts, when Diti remained pregnant for a century and he struck the fetus with a thunderbolt, creating either seven or forty-nine offspring. Famous for defeating Vritra, this King of the Devas loves drinking soma and is the father of Arjuna. FTP, identify this Vedic storm god.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 2510 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_01_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 23 | Mythology | ID: 25532

Question: The calmecacs, or religious colleges, venerated him as the god of learning. This god's name was adopted by the ruler Topiltzin, and he gathered the bones of the ancient dead in Mictlan. Some legends have him immolating himself on a pyre and emerging as what we know as the planet Venus, and his calendar name was One Reed. Expelled from Tula by Tezcatlipoca, for 10 points, identify this god who left for exile on a raft, the feathered serpent god of Aztec myth for whom Hernan Cortes was mistaken.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 2511 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_03_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 25574

Question: This figure climbed to the top of a mountain before challenging a monster to try and eat him, and afterwards cut out that monster's heart from the inside, thus freeing his friends. Using the monster's entrails he created men, while in another tradition, he kicked a ball of dirt or feces to accomplish the same goal. He boasted that he would be given the names Grizzly Bear, Eagle, or Salmon, while the Hopi usually associate him with Kokopelli. Also notable for freeing the buffalo, for 10 points, name this doglike trickster figure in Native American mythology.

ANSWER: Coyote

Result: 2512 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_04_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 26 | Mythology | ID: 25612

Question: In one of his roles, he is known as diemporos and as empolaios, and in that role he presided over the first game of dice. He sometimes served as a psychopomp, and in a more famous role, he stated that two cow hides were a sacrifice to the twelve Olympian gods, surprising Zeus and Apollo, who only knew of eleven. He fathered a man who joined together with Salmacis, and he went with Zeus to the house of Baucis and Philemon. He also slayed the watchman Argos and gave Perseus his slippers. For 10 points, name this Greek messenger god.

ANSWER: Hermes [accept Mercury before "Zeus" is read; do not accept or prompt afterwards]

Result: 2513 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_05_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 25633

Question: This god struck Hanuman in the jaw for trying to eat the sun, and this god rides the white elephant Airavata. In Jainism, this god received the hair of Mahavira, and he is aided by the Rudras. In the Puranas, the cowherders of Gokula cease worshiping this god, and Krishna lifted Mount Govardhana to protect the sheepherders from this god's rain. The father of Arjuna, for 10 points name this lightning bolt wielding king of the gods in Hindu mythology, the slayer of the dragon Vritra.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 2514 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_06_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 24 | Mythology | ID: 25667

Question: The foliage of one tree located in this place is a kenning for gold. In addition to Glasir, it contains the tree Laeraor, which provides foliage for the hart Eikpyrnir and the goat Heidrun. Its benches are strewn with coats of mail, and an eagle notably flies over this location. In the courtyard of this place are numerous men battling each other, which the einherjar partake in after eating and drinking mead out of horns. Balder died during a throwing contest in this place, which valkyries direct guests to. For 10 points, name this hall of slain warriors in Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Valhalla [or Valholl, prompt on Asgard before "courtyard"]

Result: 2515 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_07_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 25677

Question: Cimon received a command to retrieve this man's bones from Scyros, where he fled during an uprising led by Menestheus. A man who met him trying to steal his cattle, Pirithous, aided him in stealing Helen, and they were both imprisoned in Hades for trying to capture Persephone. He killed a man who tore people apart by tying them to pine trees and a man who cut or stretched people to fit his bed. He also received twine from Ariadne so he would not get lost in the labyrinth. For 10 points, name this Athenian king who killed Sinis, Procrustes, and the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 2516 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_08_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 25 | Mythology | ID: 25726

Question: Hermes took him to be raised by the thyiads of Nysa, and in one alternate myth he was born to Persephone under the name Zagreus and was ripped apart and eaten by the Titans. He punished the men of Athens with impotence for refusing to worship him, and he was kidnapped by Tyrrhenian pirates before being opposed by Lycurgus and Pentheus. His mother died after Hera tricked her into seeing Zeus in full glory, and Zeus then sewed him up into his thigh. For 10 points, name this son of Semele, the Greek god of wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus [do not accept or prompt on Bacchus]

Result: 2517 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_09_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 25745

Question: He was awarded Cassandra as part of his spoils from the Trojan War, and his fleet was unable to leave because Artemis sent him calm winds. Along with his brother, he took refuge with Tyndareus in Sparta, and that brother succeeded Tyndareus. He also married the sister of a woman who was kidnapped by Paris. He sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia, and his brother Aegisthus plotted his murder. Avenged by his son Orestes and daughter Electra, for 10 points, name this brother of Menelaus, husband of Clytemnestra, and king of Mycenae.

ANSWER: Agamemnon

Result: 2518 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_11_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 24 | Mythology | ID: 25811

Question: He fathered the six-headed Skandi by spreading his seed in Agni's mouth, and in his role as Pashupati he was a benevolent lord of animals. Depicted as the cosmic dancer Nataraja, he was the consort to a woman who built her child from mud caked onto her as she bathed, and he later sliced that child's head off. As a result, this god, with a destroying third eye, placed an elephant head on Ganesha. For 10 points, name this consort of Parvati, the Hindu god of destruction.

ANSWER: Shiva [or Siva; or Siwa]

Result: 2519 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_12_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 25818

Question: Dioxippe and Aetheria, two of this figure's offspring, are responsible for the presence of amber in the river Eridanos. A frustrated Heracles shot an arrow at him before obtaining the cattle of Geryon, and this figure later killed all of Odysseus's crew for eating some of his cattle. The father of Circe and Pasiphae, his son was said to have blackened the Ethiopian people while guiding this man's chariot. For 10 points, name this father of Phaethon, a Titan who was the Greek sun deity.

ANSWER: Helios

Result: 2520 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_12_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 25832

Question: He attacked Donatism in On Baptism, and he argued for predestination in The Predestination of the Blessed. He dismissed the claims that Rome was being sacked because the inhabitants stopped worshipping pagan gods and compared Rome unfavorably to Jerusalem, and he discussed his mother Monica and his life as a Manicheist in a work where he pledged to give up all sexuality before being baptized. For 10 points, name this bishop of Hippo and Doctor of the Church who wrote The City of God and Confessions.

ANSWER: Saint Augustine of Hippo

Result: 2521 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_13_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 25866

Question: One of these named Kur may have carried off the goddess Ereshkigal. In China, they are called lung and represent yang, and Pliny the Elder claimed that Indian elephants were at war with these. One named Fafnir was slewn by Sigurd, and Cadmus slew one and then sowed its teeth to sprout an army. The one protecting the apples of the Hesperides is named Ladon, while the patron saint of England slew one, as did Bel. For 10 points, name these mythological reptiles killed by George that sometimes breathe fire and protect hordes of gold.

ANSWER: dragons

Result: 2522 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_14_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 25874

Question: Marcus Terentius Varro showed that this deity was not worshipped in old records. One temple to this god worships a "dies meretricum" in honor of prostitutes, and as Verticordia she protected chastity. Julius Caesar built a temple worshipping her as a "begetting mother" and claimed descent from her through Aeneas. She was totally lacking of original myths, and absorbed the traits of the Greek goddess who had an affair with Adonis. The wife of Vulcan and mother of Cupid, for 10 points, name this Roman goddess of love.

ANSWER: Venus [do not accept or prompt on Aphrodite]

Result: 2523 | HSAPQ 4Q 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_15_HSAPQ4Q.pdf | Question: 23 | Mythology | ID: 25925

Question: The giant Thiazzi persuaded him to take Idunna's apples that preserve youth. While visiting Jotunheim with Thor, he encounters his "Utgard" namesake. He created Angrboda, who gave birth to his half-dead, half-alive daughter and to the wolf who bit off Tyr's hand and will swallow Odin. He tricked Hoder into killing his brother with a plant that Frigga had forgotten to ask not to harm her son, mistletoe. For 10 points, name this giant and trickster, who fights Heimdall and fathered Hel and Fenrir, in addition to facilitating the death of Balder.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2524 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_01_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 25935

Question: A tree called Laerad spreads over this locale, and its leaves are eaten by a goat and a hart atop its roof. This place with 540 massive doors and a roof of golden shields is home to a cook who uses the same cauldron to cook the cosmic boar Saehrimnir every day. The rooster Gullenkambi awakens the residents of this locale, who spar with each other all day and are known as the Einherjar. For 10 points, name this "Hall of the Slain" where Valkyries escort fallen warriors in Norse myth.

ANSWER: Valhalla

Result: 2525 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_02_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 25972

Question: The Etruscan equivalent of this god appears on the Chimera of Arezza and was the consort of Thalna and Uni; his name was Tinia. This god's oracle claimed that he was a consort of Dione and was interpreted through the rustling of oak leaves at Dodona. In some myths, he is said to have turned into an eagle to abduct his cupbearer, Ganymede, who replaced his offspring Hebe in that role. The father of Ares and Hephaestus, for 10 points, name this husband of Hera and chief Greek god.

ANSWER: Zeus [accept Jupiter before "Dione" is read; do not accept after]

Result: 2526 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_04_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 26006

Question: The anonymously authored Vulgate Cycle is sometimes named for this man, and he titles its longest section. Chretien de Troyes chronicled his rescue of a woman abducted by Meleagant in a story that labeled this man "The Knight of the Cart." This son of King Ban of Benwick accidentally killed Sir Gareth and faced off against the Dolorous Guard and fathered a son with Elaine who went on to capture the Holy Grail. For 10 points, name this father of Galahad, one of the strongest Knights of the Round Table.

ANSWER: Sir Launcelot du Lac

Result: 2527 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_06_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 26042

Question: The Celtic gods of this type are Goibhniu and Gofannon, while Wayland is a god of this type in the Northern European mythos. In the Kalevala, the creator of the Sampo is this type of god named Ilmarinen. The Greek god of this type was thrown from Mount Olympus, and had his workshop under Mount Etna where he made Athena's Aegis breastplate. For 10 points, name this type of god exemplified by Vulcan and Hephaestus, who typically make metal items for the other gods.

ANSWER: forge gods [or blacksmith gods; accept clear-knowledge equivalents]

Result: 2528 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_07_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 26068

Question: This character was given gold necklaces by Peitho, clothing and instruction on sewing by Athena, and speech by Hermes. Her name in fact refers to the gifts she received from all the gods. She was given as a wife to a man whose name means "afterthought," Epimetheus, as a revenge for the theft of fire by Epimetheus's brother Prometheus. For 10 points, name this primordial Greek woman who was only able to prevent the escape of hope after opening a jar given to her by Zeus that contained all the world's evils.

ANSWER: Pandora

Result: 2529 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_08_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 26094

Question: The Japanese Shichi Fujukin gods live in one of these, and the Celtic Manannan mac Lir has one that responds to spoken commands. Skidbladnir is one which Freyr can collapse into his pocket, while Naglfar is one made entirely of fingernails. Another one of these, which could talk because it was built in Dodona, lent its name to a group of people including Telamon, Atalanta, Orpheus, and Heracles, who sought the Golden Fleece under the leadership of Jason. For 10 points, name these conveyances, whose mythical examples included the Argo.

ANSWER: ships [accept boats or other common names for watercraft]

Result: 2530 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_09_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 26113

Question: The idea for making this object came from Helenus, who realized his cause was lost after the theft of the Palladium. Epeius supervised its creation, and after this item was finished, its creators retreated to Tenedos and burned their tents. Sinon's explanation of this item was challenged by Laocoon (lay- AH-koh-awn), who was quickly killed by a sea serpent. Such figures as Ajax the Lesser, Menelaus, and Odysseus were concealed inside it. For 10 points, name this wooden animal idol in which Greek soldiers hid, leading to the end of a mythical ten-year war.

ANSWER: the Trojan Horse

Result: 2531 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_10_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 26130

Question: One creature of this type broke Loeding and Dromi. Examples of this type of creature are named Geri and Freki and eat Odin's leftover food. Other examples of this type of animal are Hati and Skoll, who chase the horses Arvak and Alsvid in the hopes of devouring the moon and sun. Another animal of this type was bound by the Gleipnir chain after biting off Tyr's hand, and will swallow Odin at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this type of animal, exemplified by Fenrir.

ANSWER: wolf [or wolves]

Result: 2532 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_11_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 26165

Question: Before meeting the scorpion men at Mount Mashu, he tells Ninsun about his prophetic dreams. His subjects protest to Anu at the demanding labor that this king requires in order to build a wall. Aruru attempts to distract him by sending a figure who later joins this hero in a battle in the cedar forest against Khumbaba and in slaying the Bull of Heaven. Bearing the genetically implausible lineage of two-thirds god and one-third man, this king of Uruk and friend to Enkidu learns about eternal life from Utnapishtim. For 10 points, name this hero of a Sumerian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 2533 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_12_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 26185

Question: Two creatures from pre-Islamic Persian myth, the donkey god Khara and the demon Azi Dahaka, had six of these. The Greek monster Typhon issued venom from them, and Horus is said to lose these every time there is an eclipse. A guard killed by Hermes, Argus, had a hundred of these, and some of the creatures who had less than the usual number of these were Steropes, Brontes, Arges, and Polyphemus, who lost his to Odysseus. For 10 points, name these physical features, of which Shiva had three and each Cyclops had but one.

ANSWER: eyes

Result: 2534 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_13_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 26203

Question: One figure involved in this event has no weapons when it starts because Skirnir won his sword. Following this event, two people who hid in Hodmimir's Forest wake up. Setting the stage for the peopling of the Earth by Lif and Lifthrasir, it is preceded by three consecutive winters. It begins after the last sounding of Gjallarhorn, and it includes Surt setting Yggdrassil on fire, and the deaths of Tyr, the Midgard Serpent, Fenrir, Odin, and Thor. For 10 points, name this event, the apocalyptic battle of all the gods at the end of Norse mythology.

ANSWER: Ragnarok

Result: 2535 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_14_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 26220

Question: Due to a tryst with the Oceanid Philyra, this figure was the father of the wise centaur Chiron, and he eventually became the ruler of the Islands of the Blest. In conspiracy with this god, Gaia commissioned the Telchines to make an adamantine sickle, which he used to castrate his father. He was made to vomit up Hestia, Demeter, and Hades, among others, after the substitution of a stone thwarted his plan to eat all of his children. For 10 points, name this husband of Rhea and leader of the Titans, whose rule was overthrown by the Olympian gods led by his son Zeus.

ANSWER: Cronos

Result: 2536 | HSAPQ ACF 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_15_HSAPQACF1.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 26242

Question: These creatures frequently appear in the poems of an author named "He Who Has Put Evil in His Armpit." One kind of these beings could be brought back to life if it was struck again after a fatal blow. A particularly strong kind of them is made of smoke, while another kind have donkey's hooves and comprise the offspring of Iblis. Classes of these mortal but shape-shifting beings include the marid, the si'la, the ifrit, and the man-eating gul. For 10 points, name these demons of Arabian folklore, which might be found in magic lamps.

ANSWER: Genies [or Jinn]

Result: 2537 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_01_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 26268

Question: In one story, this figure is given gloves and a magical belt by Grid, which he uses to kill Gerriod. In another story, he prevented his daughter from marrying Alvis by allowing that dwarf to be petrified by daylight. In a contest rigged by a giant, this god was unable to lift up the paw of a cat, which turned out to be the Midgard Serpent, the creature that eventually kills him during Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this son of Odin, the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [or Donar]

Result: 2538 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_02_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 26284

Question: In Aborigine myth, this event began due to the laughing of a frog, and in Irish myth, Cessair was killed by one of these. In Norse mythology, one of these created by Vili, Ve, and Odin killed all but the frost giant Bergelmir. This type of event was survived by Manu in Hinduism and Pyrrha and Deucalion in Greek mythology. For 10 points, name these mythological catastrophes, whose Biblical variety lasted forty days and was survived by Noah.

ANSWER: floods [or deluges or other equivalents]

Result: 2539 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_03_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 26312

Question: This god turned Pandareus to stone for stealing a bronze dog and he rewarded Tiresias with an extended lifetime after the seer ruled in this god's favor during a dispute with his wife. Along with Hermes, this god was granted hospitality by Baucis and Philemon, and at his birth, he was cared for by the goat Almathea after being switched for a stone by his mother Rhea to trick his father Chronus. For 10 points, name this god who gave birth to Athena from his head, was the husband of Hera and was the chief god of the Greek pantheon.

ANSWER: Zeus

Result: 2540 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_04_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 26317

Question: In the mythology of these people, the death god Cizin is inferior to Itzamma, a moon god and founder of their culture. The chief god, Hunab Ku, rebuilt the world three times according to these people, who believed that the human race was created when Hunaphu and Ixblanque defeated a pair of demons at the ball game. These people worshipped the rain god Chac and chronicled the Hero Twins' descent into Xibalba (shuh-BALL-buh) in their text, the Popul Vuh. For 10 points, name this Mesoamerican civilization that preceded the Aztecs in Mexico.

ANSWER: Mayans

Result: 2541 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_05_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 26333

Question: In Hindu tradition, the sixth avatar of Vishnu, Parasurama, used an axe to kill Jamadagni in a dispute over one of these that could feed an army. In Greek mythology, Daedalus built Pasiphae a giant wooden one of these. In Norse mythology, a primordial one named Audhumbla licks the ice of Niflheim and Cadmus founded Thebes where one of these came to rest. For 10 points, name this animal which Zeus transformed Io into and which is sacred in Hindu tradition.

ANSWER: cows

Result: 2542 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_07_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 26365

Question: In Aztec myth Tonatiuh fills this role, while the Sumerian deity of this and justice was depicted inspiring Hammurabi. In addition to Shamash, a Roman god of it appeared on coins of Constantine and was worshiped by Elagabalus, while in Norse myth Skoll attempts to eat this type of deity. The Greek deity of this was identified with Hyperion and had his son Phaethon attempt to take his role of driving a chariot across the sky. For 10 points, name this role filled in Egyptian myth by Ra and in Greek myth by Helios.

ANSWER: sun gods [accept clear knowledge equivalents]

Result: 2543 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_08_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 26375

Question: This figure attacked Oechalia due to being cheated out of the prize in an archery competition, killing Eurytus and his sons. It was for the murder of Iphitus that he was forced to serve Omphale for three years. Philoctetes got his bow after his death and he killed Hippolyta while serving Eurystheus. Eurystheus also asked him to trick Atlas into getting him some golden apples and to kill the Stymphalian Birds and the Nemean Lion. For 10 points, name this son of Zeus and Alcmene who completed twelve labors and was really strong.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 2544 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_09_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 26402

Question: In one story this figure saved Arion from murderous sailors, and out of anger this figure turned the raven's feathers black. This figure flayed alive the satyr Marsyas, and a son of this figure and Coronis created the god Virbius when he raised Hippolytus from the dead, for which Zeus struck him down. In addition to fathering Asclepius, this figure granted Cassandra the gift of prophecy and killed the Python to establish his oracle at Delphi. For 10 points, name this god, a son of Leto and twin brother of Artemis.

ANSWER: Phoebus Apollo

Result: 2545 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_10_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 26433

Question: This figure suggests the plan of having Thor dress like Freya to get back Mjolnir and he gave counsel to three different couples in his role as Rig, the father of mankind. This figure's possessions include the sword Hofud and the horse Gulltopp, and his teeth are made of pure gold. He is the son of nine virgins and requires less sleep than a bird, and he will sound the Gjallarhorn at the start of Ragnarok, where he will kill and be killed by Loki. For 10 points, name this Norse god who guards the rainbow bridge Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdall

Result: 2546 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_11_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 26453

Question: One of his sons was turned into a bird for the love of the dead nymph Hesperia. In one story, this figure is ransomed with a golden veil. In addition to Aesacus, his other children included a daughter who was swallowed by a chasm, Laodice, and the Creusa that was the wife of Aeneas. In most stories he is killed by Neoptolemus. Hermes assisted this figure in sneaking through the Greek lines to plead with Achilles for the body of his son. For 10 points, name this father of Paris and Hector, the old king of Troy in the Iliad.

ANSWER: Priam

Result: 2547 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_12_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 26471

Question: One of them is a feather-god and a husband of Hina. Another owns a peacock mount, is married to Valli and Deivayanai, and is known as Murugan. The figure better known for serving this role in Hindu mythology receives the kamandalu and vajra and is the mother of Kartikeya and Ganesha. In addition to Morrigan and Durga, they include one who sprang from his mother Coatlicue fully grown as well as one who gets his arm bitten off by Fenrir. Huitzilopotchli and Tyr were, for 10 points, what this type of deity serving the same role as Ares?

ANSWER: gods of war [or goddesses of war; accept "Polynesian gods" or equivalents before "peacock"

Result: 2548 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_13_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 26496

Question: One of its creators suffered an eyelid bite, interrupting the flow of air to it but enabling its creators to sew Loki's mouth shut. Jarngreipr and Megingjorth are accessories required to use it, and Utgard-Loki disguised some mountains to create the illusion that it failed. The lustful king Thrym hoped to ransom it for Freyja's hand it marriage, but that failed when its owner killed Thrym with it. Hrungnir dies in a fight where it was used that includes the participation of Magni and Modi, who will inherit this weapon. For 10 points, name this hammer belonging to Thor.

ANSWER: Mjollnir

Result: 2549 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_14_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 4768

Question: This woman's son Parthenopeus was killed by Periclymenus in the Seven Against Thebes campaign. She was injured at Colchis and healed by Medea, and she was transformed into a lion after making love in one of Zeus's temples. After one feat, she was insulted by Iphicles and Eurypylus and was the subject of Toxeus and Plexippus' fury, but all four were killed by Meleager. Enthralled by golden apples, she lost a footrace to Hippomenes, who courted her. For 10 points, name this Greek huntress who drew the first blood of the Calydonian Boar.

ANSWER: Atalanta

Result: 2550 | HSAPQ ACF 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_15_HSAPQACF2.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 26529

Question: The mythological tradition of this country contains many stories of immrama, which are tales of voyages, such as the one of Ui Chorra. One story in this mythology deals with Briccriu's beheading challenge. According to this country's mythos, it was once ruled by the Fir Bolg, who were conquered by the Tuatha de Danann. The two main texts of this country's mythology are the Fenian and Ulster Cycles. For 10 points, name this mythological tradition that contains such figures as Finn MacCool and Deirdre.

ANSWER: Ireland [or Irish; or Celtic; do not accept "Welsh" or "Wales"]

Result: 2551 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_01_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 26546

Question: The Festival of the October Horse featured a sacrifice to this god, and Anna Perenna tricked this god into marrying her, thinking she was Minerva. The Roman battle standards initially lost at Carrhae were installed in a temple to this god built by Augustus, who worshiped him as Ultor. Flora used a magical herb to help Juno give (*) birth to this god without a father. The woodpecker was sacred to this god, and he impregnated the vestal virgin Rhea Silvia, becoming the father of Romulus and Remus. For 10 points, name this Roman god of war.

ANSWER: Mars [accept Ares]

Result: 2552 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_02_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 26569

Question: According to some sources, Iphigenia became a priestess of this figure after being saved from sacrifice. This figure sometimes replaces Selene as the lover of Endymion, and this figure caused Otis and Ephialtes to kill each other. Out of jealousy of Eos, this figure killed (*) Orion, and she took part in the killing of Niobe's children. A grandson of Cadmus named Actaeon saw her bathing naked, so she caused his own dogs to kill him, and the Calydonian Boar was her creature. For 10 points, name this maiden goddess of the hunt and sister of Apollo.

ANSWER: Artemis [accept Diana]

Result: 2553 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_03_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 26592

Question: This deity was known as Harpokrates after birth, when he emerged paralyzed from the waist down. He is sometimes associated with the war god Nemty. This god spread his semen on some lettuce, which was eaten by his rival, and he beat that rival in a boat race due to his rival's poor choice of stone as building material. He represents both the (*) sun and the moon, and is often depicted as a falcon and as the husband of Hathor. In another role, he is the ancestor of all pharaohs. For 10 points, name this defeater of Seth, the sky-god son of Osiris and Iris.

ANSWER: Horus [or Heru; or Har; or Nekheny; or Kemwer]

Result: 2554 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_04_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 26628

Question: A part of this creature was buried under a rock near the road to Elaeus. A giant crab that was an ally of this creature was made into the constellation Cancer by Hera. The charioteer who helped fight this creature was the son of Iphicles and combated it using a (*) burning brand. Pholus, Chiron, and Paris were all killed with arrows that had been dipped in the venom of this creature. Iolaus helped cauterize wounds of this resident of Lerna as Heracles methodically removed its body parts. For 10 points, name this mythical multi-headed snake.

ANSWER: the hydra

Result: 2555 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_06_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 26652

Question: Ophion and Eurynome lived here before the Titanomachy, and Ares was trapped in a jar during a war over control of this place. Otus and Ephialtes tried to reach it by stacking Ossa on top of Pelion, but were fought off by Apollo. Castor and Pollux each spend half their time in Hades and half (*) here, and Bellerophon was killed by being thrown off Pegasus by a gadfly while trying to reach this place. Hephaestus took an entire day to fall off of, for 10 points, what namesake of twelve principal Greek gods, a mountain where such gods lived?

ANSWER: Mount Olympus

Result: 2556 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_07_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 26683

Question: A pair of brothers in this tradition instructed a skinned rabbit to bathe in the sea until it was saved by another character in this tradition who slept in rooms full of snakes and insects to win the approval of his father. That father slew an eight-headed dragon, and in another story in this tradition, hurled a pony at his sister and destroyed her (*) rice fields. Those two figures were birthed from the face of another god in this tradition, who drew some islands with a jeweled spear. For 10 points, name this tradition with numerous kami, including Izanagi and Izanami.

ANSWER: Shinto myth system

Result: 2557 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_08_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 26707

Question: One god who took this form possessed the thirteen-thousand-pound Compliant Rod and became angry when he learned that his title meant "stable-boy." After stealing the peaches of immortality from the Jade Emperor, that god was assigned to guard the monk Tripitaka during a trip to India. Another god who took the form of this animal jumped from (*) India to Sri Lanka during his time fighting the demon Ravana in alliance with Rama. For 10 points, the Chinese figure Sun Wukong and the Indian deity Hanuman both appeared as what sort of primate?

ANSWER: monkeys

Result: 2558 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_09_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 26722

Question: Stories about this figure are collected in the Harivamsa, which tells how King Kamsa attempted to kill all the children of Devaki. This figure escaped to Gokula, where he was raised by Yasod and Nanda among the gopis, or (*) cowherds, loyal to this deity. Preceded by Rama and succeeded by Buddha as an avatar of Vishnu, this god serves as the charioteer for Arjuna in the Mahabharata. In that role, he narrates the Bhagavad-Gita. For 10 points, name this blue-skinned god, the namesake of the proselytizing "Hare" (HAH-ray) sect.

ANSWER: Krishna

Result: 2559 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_10_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 26757

Question: This man cleansed the evil enchantment from Dolorous Gard, renaming that castle Joyous Gard. He later fathered a child with a woman from Astolat known as "the Fair" after that woman was disguised by Pelles. He was spirited away by Vivien after the death of his father (*) Ban, years before producing a son from a union with Elaine. This man's son can occupy the Siege Perilous and ultimately succeeds in the quest for the Holy Grail. For 10 points, name this father of Galahad and adulterous lover of Guinevere, a noted Knight of the Round Table.

ANSWER: Lancelot

Result: 2560 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_11_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 26771

Question: This figure gave Hriedmar a cursed golden ring that he took from Andvari after accidentally killing Otr. He took the guise of a servant to accompany the cross-dressed Thor on a mission to reclaim Mjolnir, and at a feast hosted by Aegir, he insulted all of the gods and fled in the form of a salmon. A (*) bowl is held over his head by his wife Sigyn to catch the venom that drips into his face as punishment for causing Hoder to kill Balder, and at Ragnarok he will be killed by Heimdall. For 10 points, name this father of Hel and the Midgard serpent, a Norse trickster god.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2561 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_12_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 26802

Question: Some legends state that this figure inhabited the White Island after his death. This man could not stop himself from killing the Amazon Penthesilea, and he fell in love with and got to keep a concubine named Briseis. His son Neoptolemus received his armor after his death, and he earlier commanded the (*) Myrmidon tribe, which also saw command by his companion Patroclus. He feuded with Agamemnon, slew Hector, and was dipped into the waters of the Styx by Thetis. For 10 points, name this near-immortal warrior with a namesake heel.

ANSWER: Achilles [or Akhilleus; or Achilleus]

Result: 2562 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_13_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 26822

Question: This figure died after drinking from Tilphousa while on the way to Delphi. Menoeceus killed himself because of this figure, and he engages in revelries with Cadmus in The Bacchae. In one story this figure settles a bet between Zeus and Hera over which gender enjoys (*) sex more, and by killing a mating snake, he was turned into a woman for seven years. For seeing Athena naked he was struck blind, and Odysseus goes to the underworld so this man can foretell how he will return home. For 10 points, name this blind prophet of Greek mythology.

ANSWER: Tiresias

Result: 2563 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_14_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 26832

Question: A robber who forced passersby to wash his feet and then kicked them off a cliff was slain by this man, who also killed a giant pig, the Crommyonian sow. This best friend of Pirithous killed the bandit (*) Procrustes by fitting him into his own bed, which he accomplished after moving a rock to receive his sword and sandals. This figure also forgot to change a black sail, causing his father Aegeus to throw himself into his namesake sea. For 10 points, name this husband of Phaedra and Hippolyta, a hero who abandoned Ariadne after enlisting her help in slaying the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus [accept Sciron before "this man" is read]

Result: 2564 | HSAPQ ACF 3 | 2008 | Round: Round_15_HSAPQACF3.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 26873

Question: This figure's daughter is named Zoe, though his more famous offspring is the demonic reaper Lityerses. Roses each bear sixty blossoms in this man's garden, and in another story Silenos gets drunk and lost in this man's garden, causing a series of events ending with him bathing in the (*) Pactolus to free his daughter from statue status. He favors Pan in a music contest against Apollo, causing the latter to give this man donkey ears. An unwanted reward from Dionysus results in his misfortune. For 10 points, name this Greek king with the touch of gold.

ANSWER: King Midas

Result: 2565 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_03_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 26915

Question: Non-traditional ones include Erlanga, a Balinese prince depicted as riding the golden sun bird Garuda. Two of them have saved mankind from a flood, while another tricked the demon Bali into giving up control of all three worlds. In addition to Matsya, Varaha, and Vamana, they also include Kalki, who is yet to appear, and both Parasu Rama and Rama Chandra. The most famous of them acted as Arjuna's charioteer, Krishna, in the Mahabharata. For 10 points, name these incarnations of the preserver god in Hindu mythology.

ANSWER: avatars of Vishnu

Result: 2566 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_03_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 26927

Question: In some stories he disappeared while offering a sacrifice at the Goat's Marsh, and his wife Hersilia was deified as Hora. In one story of his birth a serving woman was sent to sleep with an apparition that appeared in the hearth of Tarchetius, and in another he was raised by Acca Larentia and Faustulus before overthrowing Amulius in favor of his grandfather Numitor. He became identified with the god Quirinus, and after he saw twelve vultures to his brother's six, he killed that brother. For 10 points, name this son of Rhea Silvia, the brother of Remus.

ANSWER: Romulus

Result: 2567 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_05_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 26953

Question: This city's war against Sicyon was motivated by Epopeus's kidnapping of Antiope, daughter of Nycteus. One of its kings took Niobe as a wife; that king's twin brother, Zethus, named the city after his own wife. After one hero defended this city from Orkhomenos, he is awarded the king's daughter, Megara. It was founded by a man who sowed dragon teeth in the ground, Cadmus, and it was the site of the struggle between Polyneices and Eteocles. For 10 points, identify this city known for being ruled by men like Laius, Creon, and Oedipus.

ANSWER: Thebes

Result: 2568 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_05_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 26969

Question: One story tells how this figure got ditched by his fishing buddy Hymir, and another tells of him losing a wrestling match to Elli due to Skrymir's magic. This figure once got a whetstone stuck in his head after a battle with Hrungnir, and had to dress up as Freya to get his most prized possession back from Thrym. This figure, who resides in Bilskirnir, rides on a chariot pulled by two goats, whose names mean "gap- tooth" and "tooth grinder," and his wife's hair was once stolen by Loki. For 10 points, name this husband of Sif and owner of the hammer Mjollnir, the Norse storm god.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 2569 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_06_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 26975

Question: Two wolves named "Greedy" and "Ravenous" devour the food that this deity doesn't eat. This deity can see far from his throne of Hlidskjalf, and has information brought to him by the ravens Huginn and Muninn. This deity hung on his spear Gungnir from the World Tree Yggdrasil in order to master the runes, and he gave up one of his eyes to drink from Mimir's well. He rides the eight-legged steed Sleipnir and will be swallowed whole by Fenrir at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this owner of Valhalla, the chief god of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Odin [accept Wodin; Woten; Wodinaz; or Wodanaz]

Result: 2570 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_08_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 27019

Question: Both the creator god and the god of death are depicted as this animal in Fijian mythology. Da Aido Hwedo is represented as this animal to the Fon, and the Aztec Coatlicue and Egyptian Apep are also depicted as this animal. The Ouroboros is depicted as one of these eating its own tail, and Quetzalcoatl is a "plumed" one of these animals. Another of these creatures was thrown into Midgard at birth and will spew Thor with venom at Ragnarok, Jormungand. For 10 points, name this animal whose form was also taken by the tempter of Eve in the Garden of Eden.

ANSWER: serpent [or snake]

Result: 2571 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_08_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 27028

Question: The Hyksos' capital city of Avaris was a former center of devotion to this god, who was elevated under Hyksos rule due to similarities with Baal. Another sacred city was Ombos, and though this god was originally depicted as a donkey, he slowly morphed into a dog-like creature. This god may be best known for scattering thirteen pieces of his brother's body after murdering him. For 10 points, name this husband of Nephthys and brother of Osiris, the Egyptian god of evil.

ANSWER: Seth

Result: 2572 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_09_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 27036

Question: This figure initiated the Oscophoria, the feast of boughs, and an oracle told this figure's father not to "loose the wine-skin foot" until he returned to his own city, but he slept with Pittheus's daughter anyway. His companion Soloon drowned himself for love of Antiope, whom this figure had captured while fighting the Amazons. He killed Cercyon, Procrustes, and Sinnis, robbers on the road from Thebes to Athens, and later he abandoned Ariadne on Naxos. For 10 points, name this Greek hero, a son of Aegeus who went to Crete to slay the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 2573 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_11_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 27080

Question: One figure of this name was a daughter of Deucalion who with Zeus was the mother of Latinus and Graecus, while Deucalian's wife Pyrrha is the daughter of this figure. Athena taught this figure needlework and gave her clothing, and Hermes gave her the power of speech after Hephaestus molded her out of clay. The first woman, she was married to Epimetheus, and her most famous action left behind hope. For 10 points, name this woman who let loose the evils of the world by opening her namesake box.

ANSWER: Pandora

Result: 2574 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_13_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 27124

Question: He once disagreed with Omphale's husband, the mountain god Tmolus, about the results of a contest between the god to whom he was devoted, Pan, and Apollo. He was adopted by Gordias and Cybele, and later became king of Phyrgia himself, or at least the city of Pessinus. Once given the ears of an ass, this figure attended to a drunk satyr, Silenus, and bathed in the river Pactolus. For 10 points, identify this king who has a certain power of transfiguration.

ANSWER: Midas

Result: 2575 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_13_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 27138

Question: One god associated with these items had his foot eaten by Cipactli and was known as the "smoking obsidian" type. In addition to Tezcatlipoca, another goddess associated with these objects was tricked into coming out of a cave after some jewels and one of these were tied to a tree, and is the Shinto sun goddess Ameterasu. For 10 points, name this type of surface, a watery one of which prompted Narcissus to fall in love with himself.

ANSWER: mirrors [accept equivalents; prompt on "reflections"]

Result: 2576 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_14_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 27159

Question: Drippings from this object were said to have created the Red Sea's coral and Egypt's vipers. This object was used by one hero to wreak havoc on a party on Sephiros, where it killed Polydectes and his nobles. It was also used to ease Atlas's pains, and was often stored in Hermes's magic bag. For 10 points, name this object that was lopped off of a Gorgon's body, has snakes for hair, and will still turn viewers to stone.

ANSWER: the head of Medusa [do not accept or prompt on "Medusa"]

Result: 2577 | HSAPQ NSC 1 | 2008 | Round: Round_15_HSAPQ_NSC1.pdf | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 27180

Question: In this figure's honor Thor kicked the dwarf Litur into a fire, and he owns the largest ship in the world, Hringhorn. He is the father of the god of justice, Forseti, with his wife Nanna. Thok thwarted Hermod's attempt to rescue this god by refusing to weep, and Vali was created with the express purpose of avenging him. When this god started having bad dreams, Frigga extracted oaths from every object not to harm him, but skipped mistletoe. For 10 points, name this Norse god killed by his blind brother Hoder.

ANSWER: Balder

Result: 2578 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_02_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 27206

Question: In some stories, this god kicks Littur onto the funeral pyre of Baldur. This god protects his daughter from having to marry Alvis by asking Alvis questions until sunrise, at which point he is turned to stone. His possessions include a chariot pulled by goats, as well as a belt and special gloves. While visiting Utgard-Loki, this god fails to pick up a cat, which is later revealed to be his nemesis, Jormungand. The sons of Ivaldi made this husband of Sif a tool he uses to slay many giants, Mjollnir the hammer. For 10 points, name this Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [or Donar]

Result: 2579 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_03_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 27236

Question: In this people's belief system, a god represented by the planet Venus was a destructive force who failed to shoot down the sun, and their earth goddess wore a necklace of hearts taken from her victims. The rain god of this people was depicted with a crown of heron feathers, and carried four jugs, the last of which brought destruction. In addition to Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli, Coatlicue, and Tlaloc, they also worshipped a feathered serpent, who was said to one day return by boat. For 10 points, name this people of Central America, known for their worship of Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Aztecs

Result: 2580 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_04_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 27254

Question: This deity fathered the god of cheese-making, Aristaeus, and seduced Coronis to father the legendary healer Asclepius. This god competed with Zephyrus for the love of Hyacinthus, and punished Marsyas for losing a musical contest by flaying him alive. He killed the giant snake Python to take possession of his oracle at Delphi. This son of Zeus and Leto carried a bow and a lyre in his roles as the god of archery and music. For 10 points, name this Greek god of light and poetry, the twin brother of Artemis.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 2581 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_05_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 27293

Question: Apart from being the god of war, Hadur is the god of this in Hungarian paganism. The Norse god of this is Wayland, and the goose-riding Visvakarma is the Hindu god of it. The Finnish god of this created the sampo, or mill of plenty, and is named Ilmarinen. The Greek god of this created Pandora out of dirt, and once spent nine days and nights falling from Mount Olympus. That god was married to Aphrodite despite being lame, and created the shield of Aeneas. For 10 points, name this role played by Hephaestus, which involves making things from heated metals.

ANSWER: smithery [accept clear equivalents like divine smiths; accept copper smithery before "Norse";

Result: 2582 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_06_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 27301

Question: George Dumezil compared this figure to the Ossetic demon Syrdon. This god once impaled an eagle after the eagle ate too much of an ox he was eating; that adventure ended with him transforming Idun into a nut to rescue her from the giant Thiazi. After this god tricked Hodr, Hel offered to let a dead god return if every living thing would mourn, but Thokk, possibly this god in disguise, refused. For 10 points, name this god who until Ragnarok is chained to a rock with a snake dripping venom on him, the trickster of the Norse pantheon.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2583 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_07_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 27339

Question: Stribog is the god of this thing in Slavic mythology, while the antelope-riding father of Hanumna, Vayu, is the Hindu god of it. The Shinto god of this carries a large bag and has a brother named Raijin, who is the thunder god. Apart from Fujin, gods of this include the Anemoi of the Greeks and the Venti of the Romans. Another Greek god of it gave Odysseus a bag which, when opened, released it in all directions. For 10 points, name this phenomenon whose gods include Aeolus, Zephyrus, and Boreas.

ANSWER: winds

Result: 2584 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_08_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 27365

Question: This man's victory over Iole in an archery contest was short-lived, and he was forced to wear women's clothing while in the service of Omphale. After Laomedon reneged on a promise of horses, this figure slaughtered all his sons save Priam, and he killed a giant who got strength from touching ground by strangling him in midair, Antaeus. This husband of Megara and Deianira married Hebe on Mount Olympus. For 10 points, name this Greek strongman who counted cleaning the Augean Stables and retrieving the girdle of Hippolyta among his twelve labors.

ANSWER: Heracles [or Hercules]

Result: 2585 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_09_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 27376

Question: An obscure story about this man states that he once accidentally dropped some toys into the underworld and sent his friend to get them back, only to have his friend imprisoned there. A woman bakes seven loaves of bread in seven days to show that this man had slept for a week. After taking advice from Utanapishtim, this man is foiled when a snake eats an herb that he found at the bottom of a lake. Said to be two-thirds man and one-third immortal, he slays Humbaba and the Bull of Heaven. For 10 points, name this King of Uruk and friend of Enkidu, the namesake of a Sumerian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 2586 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_10_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 27411

Question: This god was the father of the Argonaut Nauplios by the Danaid Amymone, and his seduction of Iphimedeia produced two giants that imprisoned Ares in a bronze jar before being outwitted by Artemis and killing each other, Otus and Ephialtes. Zeus allowed this man to sleep with Eurynome; that union produced a hero that would slay the Chimera, Bellerophon. In some myths he is the father of Theseus. For 10 points, name this Greek god whose wife Amphitrite presumably minded his dalliances with mortal women less than Hera did, the Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon

Result: 2587 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_11_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 27423

Question: The children of this deity were said to protect the canopic jars. She appears with her sister on coffins with outstretched wings, and her pairing with Ra caused her to be conflated with Hathor. She gained powers of magic after learning the true name of Ra using a snake, believed to be Wadjet. Her husband was trapped a box and cut into pieces before she was able to seek out his pieces and reassemble him. For 10 points, name this mother of Horus and wife of Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis

Result: 2588 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_12_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 27446

Question: In some stories this figure is descended from Lynceus and Hypermnestra, one of the Danaids. While at an athletic contest in Larissa, he threw a discus into the crowd, fulfilling a prophecy by killing Acrisius. Raised by the fisherman Dictys, he received a silver wallet from the Hyperboreans after taking the one eye shared by the three Graeae. While in Ethiopia he rescued Andromeda, and his mother was put to sea in a chest after being impregnated by a shower of gold. For 10 points, name this son of Danae who used Hermes' winged sandals to kill Medusa.

ANSWER: Perseus

Result: 2589 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_13_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 27488

Question: A book subtitled "The Riddles of Culture" by Marvin Harris is titled after [These creatures], Pigs, Wars, and Witches. One belief system claims people become sanctified by bathing in a mixture of water and this creature's poop, and another claims that one of these creatures licked Buri to life and fed Ymir. In addition to Audhumla, the "primordial" one, another of these creatures was pursued by a gadfly before Zeus changed Io back from this form. For 10 points, name this animal that is sacred in Hinduism.

ANSWER: cows [accept cattle or clear-knowledge equivalents; accept bulls until "Buri" but do not accept

Result: 2590 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_14_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 27499

Question: This mythical figure won a battle at Menevia over Pasgen. He defeated King Gilloman in Ireland to retrieve the Giant's Ring so that his brother, Ambrosius Aurelianus, could build Stonehenge, and he led a rebellion against Vortigern. He fought another conflict with Gorlois, and infiltrated Tintagel Castle in order to seduce Gorlois's wife Igraine after being enchanted to look like Gorlois with the help of Merlin. In exchange, he promised Merlin the son born of the union, who later ruled from Camelot. For 10 points, name this father of King Arthur.

ANSWER: Uther Pendragon [prompt on Pendragon]

Result: 2591 | HSAPQ NSC 2 | 2008 | Round: Round_15_HSAPQ_NSC2.pdf | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 27535

Question: This figure caused Famine to make Erysichthon always hungry after he chopped down a tree sacred to this figure. Triptolemus became this figure's representative, and this figure attempted to make Demophoon immortal by placing him in the fire each night. She made an ivory shoulder for Pelops after accidentally eating his real one. A daughter of this goddess ate a pomegranate seed, forcing her to spend four months of the year in the underworld. For 10 points, name this Greek grain goddess, the mother of Persephone.

ANSWER: Demeter [accept Ceres]

Result: 2592 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_1.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 27554

Question: In one story, this figure is disguised as the island farmer Grimner and tries to convince Geirrod to be good, but this god later visits Geirrod and finds Geirrod has taken to torturing guests. Another time, this figure takes the name Bolverk and works for Bauge in order to gain access to Suttung's cellar, wherein the work of Galar and Fjalar with Kvaser's blood could be found. This god also takes on the name of Gangraad when he challenges Vafthrudner, and his eventual victory comes when he asks what he whispered to Baldur on Baldur's funeral pyre. His eight-legged horse is named Sleipnir, and he drank from Mimer's well at the cost of an eye. FTP, name this god who brought mead to Asgard, the husband of Frigg and father of Thor.

ANSWER: Odin or Woden or Wotan

Result: 2593 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_10.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 27562

Question: This god's attempt to mate with Athena resulted in Athena's disappearance and the birth of Erecthonius. The Iliad says that this god was married to Aglaea, one of the Graces, and he was saved by Eurynome and Thetis. Arges, Brontes, and Steropes helped him, and this god in turn aided in Athena's birth. Dionysus intoxicated this god, put him on a mule, and carried him to Olympus. This god then released Hera from a magic throne, who lamed this god by throwing him off Mount Olympus due to his ugliness. He was rewarded with Aphrodite, who promptly cheated on him with Ares. For 10 points, name this Greek equivalent of the Roman Vulcan, the god of the forge.

ANSWER: Hephaestus

Result: 2594 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_10.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 27569

Question: This man's marriage to Philanoe produced Isandros, Hippolokos, and Laodamia, the latter of whom gave birth to Sarpedon. In the Iliad, this man's story is narrated by his grandson Glaucus, and his grandfather stole cattle from Autolycus. This man evaded assassins when Poseidon flooded the plains of Xanthus, and he was blinded as a result of Zeus sending a gadfly to admonish him of his pride. After he supposedly assaulted the wife of Proteus, he was sent to Iobates of Lycia to receive his most famous quest, which required the help of Polyeidos and a creature that sprang forth from the slain Medusa. For 10 points, who is this hero who rode Pegasus and slew the Chimera?

ANSWER: Bellerophon

Result: 2595 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_10.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 27579

Question: Hyginus describes this god as the eldest son of Aether and Gaia, while Hesiod says he is the eldest son of Clymene and Iapetus. His younger brother Menoetius was disrespectful to Zeus, and his offsprings include Merope and Calypso. Ovid told a story of how his refusal to shelter Perseus led to him being turned to stone by Medusa's head. Heracles offered to shoulder this god's burden if he would retrieve the golden apples of the Hesperides, who, along with the Pleiades, were his daughters. For 10 points, name this brother of Prometheus who was punished by perpetually holding up the Heavens.

ANSWER: Atlas

Result: 2596 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_2.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 27589

Question: One of this man's sons learned the interpretation of dreams from Merops and fell in love with the daughter of Cebren, Hesperia. Besides fathering Aesacus, he fathered Gorgythion by Castianeira, and he avoided the wrath of Heracles by giving up a golden veil belonging to his sister Hesione and thus became the uncle of,Teucer. Most of his children were with the daughter of Dymas and this man was once aided by Hermes in asking Achilles' for the body of one his sons back. For 10 points, name this father of Polyxena, Deiphobus, Helenus, and Hector, a king of Troy.

ANSWER: Priam

Result: 2597 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_3.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 27610

Question: He filled five ponds with blood when he killed every member of a caste 21 times in revenge for the killing of Jamadagni. He once disguised himself as Mohini to trick the Asuras and while carrying a wooden umbrella, he takes three steps and grants Mahabali immortality. He protects Prahlada from his father and married Prithvi after spending a thousand years battling with Hiranyaksha. At the end of time, he rides a white horse as Kalki, and to save the Vedas from the demon Hayagriva he took the form of the fish Matsya. For 10 points, name this Hindu god, who numbers a boar, a tortoise, and a dwarf among his avatars.

ANSWER: Vishnu (Take Rama-with-the-axe or Parashurama; take Vamana, Varaha, or Narasimha)

Result: 2598 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_6.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 27644

Question: They once made an expedition to the island of Leuke, although an apparition badly frightened their horses. Referred to as the Antianeira in The Iliad, they were subdivided into three races, including the Chadesians, who made good use of the javelin, and the Themiscryeans, who were prevented from engaging the Argonauts when Zeus provided a north-west wind. However, a more famous band of them were led by an individual absolved of wrongdoing by Priam in return for military support; that woman, Penthesilaea, was the object of affection of Achilles, who reluctantly faced her in combat. Including one whose girdle was stolen by Heracles for a labor, For 10 points, identify this group which includes various Hippolytes, a tribe of one-breasted warrior women.

ANSWER: Amazons

Result: 2599 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_7.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 27660

Question: In Romanian folklore, Ileana has garments made of these objects, and in Chinese Buddhism, souls appear before the boddhisattva Dha-shi-zhi in the shape of them in heavenly paradise. The daughter of Oho-Yama and wife of Ninigi, Ko-no-Hana, is a princess of them, while Xochipilli is the prince of these objects in Aztec myth. Kama fletched his arrows with them, while in Greek myth, they are ruled by the wife of Zephyrus, Chloris. For 10 points, name these objects, one of which Narcissus turned into after his death.

ANSWER: Flowers

Result: 2600 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_8.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 27680

Question: This mythological figure's grandfather is said to be the sun god Helios, who provides this person with an escape vehicle, a golden chariot pulled by dragons. After being exiled to Corinth, this figure causes the death of that city's King Creon, who becomes fatally ill upon embracing his poisoned daughter, Glauce. Once she is assured by King Aegeus that Athens will be a place of refuge, she then expresses her jealousy of Glauce's affair with her husband by stabbing her two children to death. For 10 points, name this murderous sorceress, title character of a Euripedes play and wife of Jason.

ANSWER: Medea

Result: 2601 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_8.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 27692

Question: One member of this group was killed by another after spitting a fish and coughing up rice. One of them is depicted as a dark demon wearing leopard skin carrying a bag and another is associated with white foxes. Another is a dragon residing in a palace of red and white coral, while yet another is said to eat bellybuttons and take away navels. Besides Fujin, Inari, and Ryujin, one member of this group associated with storms slew Yamata-no-Orochi and was disliked by his sister Amaterasu. For 10 points, name this group of Japanese spirits worshipped in Shinto.

ANSWER: Kami (take Japanese spirits or Shinto spirits or anything like that until they are mentioned)

Result: 2602 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_9.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 27708

Question: He once fell in love with a nymph, the mother of Tarquitus, and in a version of that story he seduced her by turning into a tortoise and then, once she took him into her lap, turned into a snake and raped her. While Timolus judged, Midas received the ears of an ass for dissenting in a contest between this god and Pan. This god traveled to the Castalian Spring at Delphi to kill the Python, and one of his more notable love interests rejects him until she morphs into a bay laurel tree. This would-be lover of Daphne and twin brother of Artemis is, for 10 points, what patron of music, the Greek successor to Helios as god of the sun?

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 2603 | NNT | 2008 | Round: NNT_Packet_9.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 27717

Question: Lugh, a Celtic depiction of this object, joins the Tuatha de Danaan in fighting the Fomorii. In Incan myth, the god of this was married to the earth goddess Pachamama, and sent his children to teach mankind to be civilized. In Chinese tradition, Hou Yi is believed to have used arrows to destroy nine of them. The Japanese god of this had a brother who cut through her roof and dropped a dead horse through, causing her to hide in a cave. The Egyptian one fights a never ending battle against Apep, and the Greeks depicted it as a chariot. For 10 points, name this object, represented by such deities as Inti, Amaterasu, and Ra.

ANSWER: the Sun

Result: 2604 | NTV | 2008 | Round: r2tossups.pdf | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 27744

Question: (JG) He is credited with founding the Isthmian Games, and his story is told in book eleven of the Odys- sey and also in the Iliad. Some sources call him the father of Odysseus, and all accounts give his father as Aeolus. His wife Merope was central to his best-known action, since at his behest she did not perform sacrifices and didn't bury him. This followed a rescue of Death by Ares, and resulted in him having to die twice, leading to his punishment. Name this Greek mythological figure dramatized by Camus who repeat- edly rolls a boulder up a hill after it rolls back down each time.

ANSWER: Sisyphus

Result: 2605 | NTV | 2008 | Round: r6tossups.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 27826

Question: (DT) His followers referred to him as Taurokeros [taw roh KEHR ohs] or Tauroprosopos [taw roh PROH soh pohs], as they believed he took the form of the beast sacrificed during the omophagia [oh moh FAY jee ah]. According to the Orphic tradition, this god was torn to pieces by the Titans, but his heart was saved, and given to his mother to consume. Tyrrhenian [turr EE nee un] pirates who kidnapped him were turned into dolphins, and in retaliation for trying to prevent the worship of this deity, Pentheus [pen THEE us] was ripped apart by his own mother, who was part of the Maenads. The son of Zeus and Se- mele [SEH muh lee], identify this god of wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus or Bacchus

Result: 2606 | NTV | 2008 | Round: r8tossups.pdf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 27860

Question: (DR) The names of his goats mean "tooth gnasher" and "tooth grinder". He often ate them, and then used magic to put them back together from their fur and bones. His wife was known for her beautiful golden hair, though she actually wore a wig after her hair was cut off. This god became associated with his magic hammer, which came back to him every time he threw it, and with Loki, who often traveled with him. Name this son of Odin.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 2607 | NTV | 2008 | Round: r9tossups.pdf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 27878

Question: (DT) The Hippocrene was created by this figure, which was captured while drinking from a well on the Acrocotinth, and it may have been the brother of Chrysaor. Residing on Mount Helicon, shortly after its birth, Zeus employed it to carry his thunderbolts. Assisting Bellerophon in the slaying of the Chimera, it was stung with a gadfly when Bellerophon tried going up Mount Olympus. Name this creature that sprung forth from the neck of Medusa, a winged horse.

ANSWER: Pegasus

Result: 2608 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 27897

Question: Aeschylus claims that one punishment of this man was exacted in the presence of Cratos and Bia by Hephaestus, and that during that punishment he was visited by Io and the Oceanides. He suggested that Deucalion and Pyrrha build a ship to escape the flood, and he once tricked Zeus into taking just the fat and bones of a bull by hiding the meat in the skin, but Zeus later bound him to a rock and had a bird eat his liver. For 10 points, identify this Titan, whose name means "forethought" and who stole fire from the gods.

ANSWER: Prometheus

Result: 2609 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 26 | Mythology | ID: 27907

Question: One of this figure's relatives was the pet of Phaia and was slain by Theseus, while another of his offspring was clubbed to death on Mount Abas by the same person who strangled another of this character's children in a cave. The firebrand-wielding Iolaus assisted in the death of the child of this character who lived at Lerna, and, like Cronos, this character earlier used an adamantine sickle to cut the sinews of Zeus. For 10 points, name this monster that fathered Orthros, the Nemean Lion, and the Hydra with Echidna.

ANSWER: Typhon

Result: 2610 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 11.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 27935

Question: This figure's husband, the brother of Zethus, could, like Orpheus, move stones with the music of his lyre, a talent which helped him to build Thebes. She was the mother of Meliboea, who became pale and took the name Chloris, and this figure's tears were the souce of the river Achelous after she was turned to stone on Mount Sypilus. She had a high enough opinion of her offspring to insult Leto for having only two. For 10 points, identify this braggart whose twelve children were killed by Apollo and Artemis.

ANSWER: Niobe

Result: 2611 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 12.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 27952

Question: Her tale was first told by Roger of Wendover, and Ranulf Higden said that only horses were exempted from the repeal which she effected. She was the wife of Leofric and advocated a reduction in the taxes levied on Coventry, being challenged by her husband to appear in the marketplace in a certain fashion in order to get her wish. About four hundred years after her legend arose, an addendum about the mischevious "peeping Tom" first appeared. For 10 points, name this woman who rode on a white horse with only her long hair to cover herself.

ANSWER: Lady Godiva [or Godgifu]

Result: 2612 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 12.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 27961

Question: Like his son Polites, this man fell victim to a rampage at the altar of Zeus Herceius. This son of Strymo was originally known as Podarces, but gained a new name when he was ransomed from Heracles by Hesione, going on to father a hundred children including Polyxena and Troilus. Before being killed by Neoptolemus, he mediated the duel between Menelaus and Paris and made a trip to the tent of Achilles. For 10 points, identify this husband of Hecuba and father of Hector, the king of Troy in the epic period.

ANSWER: Priam

Result: 2613 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 12.doc | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 27971

Question: Late in this person's life he became the king of Argos upon the death of Cylarabes, soon after which he fathered Tisamenus with Menelaus' daughter, his cousin Hermione. Growing up in the court of Strophius allowed him to befriend Pylades, He once sacrificed a lock of hair on his father's tomb; later, he avenged the death of that father with the help of his sister Electra. For 10 points, identify this son of Agamemnon and killer of Aegisthus and Clytaemnestra, the namesake of a Euripides trilogy.

ANSWER: Orestes

Result: 2614 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 13.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 27980

Question: In this culture's mythology, creating humanity took three tries; mud-based people simply dissolved, while wooden men were destroyed by the one-legged weather god. Also in their myths, the demon Seven Macaw was killed with a blowgun by someone who survived the trials of Cold House and Razor House in Xibalba (shih-BALL-buh). The hero twins Hunahpu and Xbalanque (shih-buh-LAHN-kay) are prominent in this group's epic. For 10 points, identify this culture whose gods include Chac and whose myths are contained in the Popol Vuh.

ANSWER: Mayans [or Mayas]

Result: 2615 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 13.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 27986

Question: An inverted vase symbolized the "unlucky" one, while minor examples include Kaikias and Skiron. One of them was the kidnapper of Oreithyia; that one also fathered Butes. With Celaeno, one of them fathered the horses Balius and Xanthus; he also jealously caused the death of Hyacinthus. They are the sons of Eos and Astraeus, who himself is often associated with their keeper Aeolus, who gave a bag of them to Odysseus. For 10 points, identify this group including Boreas and Zephyrus, the north and west ones.

ANSWER: the winds [or the Anemoi]

Result: 2616 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 14.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 28014

Question: One of these, known as Heaven's Will, was retrieved by a golden-shelled turtle from the Vietnamese king Le Loi for the dragon king Long Vuong. The souls of twelve berserkers were contained in Skofnung, the one owned by Hrolf Kraki. Amir Arsalan exploited the weakness of Fulad-zereh to one called Shamshir, while Susanowo took one from the body of Orochi called Kusanagi. For 10 points, Sigurd's Gram, Roland's Durandal, and Beowulf's Hrunting are all what type of object, as is King Arthur's Excalibur?

ANSWER: swords

Result: 2617 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 28028

Question: This character once rescued the princess Derbforgaill and awarded her to his foster son Lugaid. After training in Scotland, this character stormed the castle of Forgall to win his wife Emer. He fought single-handedly at the Cattle Raid of Cooley against the armies of Maeve and is famously skilled with his spear, Gae Bulg. For 10 points, name this hero of the Ulster cycle, formerly known as Setanta, who was renamed after he killed the hound of the smith Culann.

ANSWER: Cuchulainn

Result: 2618 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 28080

Question: A queen of the Amazons who fought for Troy was this figure's daughter Penthesilea, while the fact that he is the father of Harmonia makes him an ancestor of Dionysus. Alala was the daughter of his attendant Polemos, and he was also attended by the Machae. Athena helped drive Diomedes's spear into this god, and he turned Alectryon into a rooster for failing to prevent the discovery of his affair with Aphrodite. For 10 points, identify this father of Enyo, Phobos and Deimos who was the Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares

Result: 2619 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 22 | Mythology | ID: 28088

Question: One character of this name reportedly had a five-cubit pet dragon; that character, the son of Rhene and Oileus, was killed by Athena in revenge for an offense against Cassandra. Another figure of this name sparred evenly against Odysseus at Patroclus's funeral games and knocked Hector down with a large stone. He hallucinated that some sheep were his enemies after losing the armor of Achilles to Odysseus. For 10 points, identify the common name of these two Greek heroes, known as "the Lesser" and "the Greater."

ANSWER: Ajax

Result: 2620 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 28096

Question: Among this character's offspring are the group of ash-tree nymphs known as the Meliae, and several stories claim that he's the father of Dionysus's companion Silenus. The Orphic hymns identify him as the son of Nyx. Other children of this character include Pallas's father Crius, as well as Theia. He was notably attacked by one of his sons with a flint sickle, producing the Furies and Aphrodite. For 10 points, identify this castrated personification of "Father Sky," the father of the Titans and son and husband of Gaia.

ANSWER: Uranus [or Ouranos]

Result: 2621 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 28123

Question: The Argives claim that this character was raised by the three daughters of the river Asterion. The lighting of a funeral pyre for this figure's stepson angered her, and in retaliation she caused a snake to bite Philoctetes. She promised Paris the kingship of all Europe and Asia in an attempt to win his judgment, and her sacred animal was the peacock. For 10 points, identify this goddess of marriage, mother of Hebe, Hephaestus, and Ares, wife of Zeus, and queen of the gods.

ANSWER: Hera [or Here]

Result: 2622 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 28131

Question: Plutarch claims that Thamus proclaimed this figure's death in Palodes to much lamentation. This figure is sometimes credited with fathering Iambe with Echo, and his pursuit of the nymph Pitys saw her become a pine tree to escape this figure. Tmolus officiated a contest between this man and Apollo that ended with King Midas ruling in this character's favor, earning ass-ears as punishment. His attempted rape of Syrinx ended when she turned into a bunch of reeds. For 10 points, name this half-goat god of shepherds who played his namesake pipes.

ANSWER: Pan

Result: 2623 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 28144

Question: One form of this deity guarded fertility and wore a crown of scorpions. This character wears a crown of bull's horns and holds the ankh, and this deity's knowledge of Ra's secret name led this twin of Nepthys to be considered the foremost magician. Her status as the universal mother stemmed from her role as the mommy of Horus, and she also gathered up the chunks of her husband after he had been cut to pieces by Seth. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, the wife of Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis [accept Aset]

Result: 2624 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 28166

Question: This work describes the concept of Rita which is born from heaven and earth. Its final section contains the Purusha Sukta and the first book in this text addresses only gods associated with nature, the Maruts. The Nasadiya Sukta is often termed as the creation hymn of this text, which describes Agni as the priest of the gods. First translated into English by Ralph Grifith, it can be divided into 8 ashtakas or 10 mandalas. Its ninth book contains hymns for Soma, though most of this work is dedicated to Indra. For 10 points, identify this text that was written before the Sama, Yajur, and Atharva Vedas.

ANSWER: Rig Veda

Result: 2625 | PACE NSC | 2008 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 28199

Question: The cavorting of the dwarf Lit once angered this character enough that he kicked Lit onto a funeral pyre. He once forced another dwarf, Alvis, to prove his wisdom, taking so long the sun petrified him; later, Grid assisted him in killing the giant Geirrod. His fishing line was cut by the cowardly giant Hymir, and his chariot is pulled by a pair of magic goats. He also had to wrestle a cat that turned out to be his rival Jormungandr, the Midgard Serpent. For 10 points, identify this wielder of Mjolnir, the Norse god of thunder.

ANSWER: Thor [accept Thunor, Thunaer, Donar, or Thunraz]

Result: 2626 | Prison Bowl | 2008 | Round: Round 1.rtf | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 28223

Question: According to Pausanias, the statue of Britomartis in the temple of Olous was made by him, and in the Iliad, Homer calls him the creator of a wide dancing-ground.

ANSWER: Daedalus

Result: 2627 | Prison Bowl | 2008 | Round: Round 10.rtf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 28233

Question: In one legend, she took the form of a wild cat and killed all who come near, but Thoth told her stories to get her to come back, and her cult was centered at Dandarah.

ANSWER: Hathor

Result: 2628 | Prison Bowl | 2008 | Round: Round 2.rtf | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 28265

Question: His courage came from the thunder god Adad, and to amuse himself he sounded the tocsin. He loses the pukku and mikku, and on his journey he encounters the only man to survive the Flood. Two scorpions at the base of Mount Mashu warn him of impending danger, and he has to prove his identity to the tavernkeeper Siduri. He dreams of a meteorite that he is forced to compete with, and has another where he has to fight an axe. A snake consumes the plant he found that would restore his youth, and he is offered the chance to become immortal if he can stay awake for six days and seven nights. His friend dreams of a "house of dust" after they (*) slay the Bull of Heaven sent to kill him after he rejects Ishtar's marriage proposal, and he returns home on a raft of cedar after slaying Humbaba. FTP, identify this King of Uruk and subject of a Babylonian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 2629 | Prison Bowl | 2008 | Round: Round 3.rtf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 28272

Question: According to Homer, the breezes of Zephyrus always fan at this location on the banks of the Oceanus, while Hesiod places it in the Isles of the Blessed.

ANSWER: Elysium (accept Elysian Fields or Elysion)

Result: 2630 | Prison Bowl | 2008 | Round: Round 4.rtf | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 28291

Question: An early known example of one was Kur, who was killed by Enki, Ninurta, and Inanna. In Korea , they are said to resemble the outlines of mountain chains. The Chinese type is usually benevolent, and their bones were believed to have medicinal uses.

ANSWER: dragons

Result: 2631 | Prison Bowl | 2008 | Round: Round 7.rtf | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 28331

Question: He was given the epithet Gullintani due to the gold teeth in his mouth, and he has nine different mothers.

ANSWER: Heimdallr (accept Rig early)

Result: 2632 | Prison Bowl | 2008 | Round: Round 8.rtf | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 28343

Question: Askr and Embla were born from it, four deer run across it, representing the winds, and the Roaring Kettle, which serves as the source of rivers, lies beneath it.

ANSWER: Yggdrasil (accept Laerad or Mimameidr, prompt on Tree of Life, World Tree, or similar)

Result: 2633 | Prison Bowl | 2008 | Round: Round 9.rtf | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 28376

Question: In the Iliad, he is the husband of Aglaea, and Dionysus was allowed to join the pantheon after getting him drunk.

ANSWER: Hephaestus

Result: 2634 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: FINALS.rtf | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 28392

Question: This work was influential for future poetry in its language by its introduction of the sloka meter. In one scene Kaikeyi reminds the king of his promise, and machinates to have her son placed on the throne. That son, Bharata, is aghast at his mother's behavior and places the title character's sandals on the throne once belonging to Dasaratha. Banished to the forest the main character, the prince of Ayodhya, along with his brother Laskmanna and the monkey-king Hanuman must fight the king of the Rakshahas. For 10 points, name this Sanskrit epic traditionally attributed to Valmiki which follows the life of the titular hero and his saving of his wife, the beautiful Sita from the demon Ravena.

ANSWER: Ramayana

Result: 2635 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: Round1Final.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 28423

Question: The Hindu deity Murugan rides one of these creatures, and Krishna is often depicted wearing a crown including this creature's feathers. One story explaining their origin involves the giant son of Arestor, who was given the task of guarding a particular heifer. Hermes was sent to kill that hundred-eyed giant, Argos, because he was guarding Io, and after Hermes beheaded Argos, his master placed his hundred eyes onto this bird. For 10 points name this fowl associated with Hera and known for its ostentatious tail plumage.

ANSWER: peacock (really shouldn't accept peafowl-nobody cares about the females)

Result: 2636 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: Round2Final.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 28456

Question: In Mayan mythology, the god Camazotz had the head of this type of animal, and the frontier marshal William Barclay Masterson was nicknamed for this type of animal. Thomas Nagel wrote a 1974 essay entitled "What Is it Like to Be" this animal. The aria "Mein Herr Marquis" is featured in an opera by Johann Strauss the Younger that is named for this type of animal. Belonging to the order Chiroptera, these are, for 10 points, what winged mammals that navigate and hunt prey using echolocation?

ANSWER: bats

Result: 2637 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: Round3Final.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 28466

Question: His father is usually given as Oeagreus, and his aunt, the muse Thalia, was courted by the god who would train him in his prodigous talent, Apollo. His mother was Calliope, who is sometimes said to also be the mother of Linus, a man whose talent approached that of this figure. Rocks and sticks refused to harm him because of his special talent, eliciting a Pentheus-like story where the Maenads tore him apart, leaving only his head. For 10 points, name mythical Greek musician who failed to rescue his wife Eurydice from the underworld.

ANSWER: Orpheus

Result: 2638 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: Round4Final.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 28494

Question: This deity was kidnapped and trapped in a bronze pot for thirteen months by Otus and Ephialtes, the giant sons of Poseidon. One of his sons, Cycnus, was killed after challenging Heracles to combat. He cursed the House of Thebes for Cadmus's killing a dragon sacred to him, though his daughter with Aphrodite, Harmonia, married Cadmus later. Trapped in a special net by Hephaestus while in embrace with his lover Aphrodite, this is, for 10 points, what Greek god of war?

ANSWER: Ares

Result: 2639 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: Round5Final.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 28511

Question: In Greek myth, the wife of Orion, Side (see-day), hurled herself off a cliff after Hera made her believe she had killed her own children, and where she died her blood created the first tree of this fruit. A dwarf version of this fruit bears the name of Nana, a virgin Greek nymph who was made pregnant when this fruit fell on her, leading to the birth of Attis. Four seeds of this fruit were eaten by the daughter of an Olympian, leading her to have to spend four months in Hades every year. For 10 points, what is this fruit which was tasted by Demeter's daughter Persephone, leading to the origin of winter in Greek myth?

ANSWER: pomegranate

Result: 2640 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: Round6Final.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 28528

Question: According to one story, it was constructed at Carduel and was given as a gift to Leodegraunce. Its most famous owner received it when he married Leodegraunce's daughter, and according to the Roman de Brut, it was built after knights fought over a prime location near the king during a Christmas feast. It was designed so no individual was greater than any other, and people who have sat here include Yvaine, Percival, and Galahad. Built by Merlin for Uther Pendragon, this is, for 10 points, what piece of furniture at which Arthur and his knights deliberated on military matters.

ANSWER: Round Table

Result: 2641 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: Round7Final.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 28541

Question: Alternate names of this deity include Hallinskidi, meaning "one who leans with sticks," but meant to refer to a ram, as well as Gullintani, a name referring to his golden teeth. In one story, he takes the name of Rig when approaching a farmhouse, while in another he takes the form of a seal to fight Loki and retrieve the necklace Brising, appropriate since he is fated to kill and be killed by Loki at Ragnarok. Possessing the ability to hear grass grow, this son of the nine daughters of Aegir is fated to blow his Gjallarhorn at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this guardian of Bifrost.

ANSWER: Heimdall

Result: 2642 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: Round8Final.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 28562

Question: The thyrsus, which is typically associated with Maenads, is a staff comprising both pine cone and fennel often depicted as being carried by these creatures. One of them told Midas that the best thing is for a man never to be born, and if he must be born, to die soon. Besides Silenus, their number included one who was flayed alive by Apollo after losing a music contest, Marsyas. The creator of the race famously chased the nymph Syrinx until she turned herself into a bundle of reeds. Depicted as drunken, sex-crazed figures, for 10 points, name these woodland creatures with goat features descended from Pan.

ANSWER: satyrs (grudgingly accept "fauns")

Result: 2643 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: Round9Final.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 28588

Question: In the role of Pashipati, he is the lord of animals, and he is also considered the origin of truth, or satyam. His first consort, Sati, lured him away from his ascetic practices but immolated herself due to her father's displeasure, leading this deity to unleash Virabhadra and Bhadrakali in his anger. As Nataraja, he is the king of dance, and he broke the fall of Ganga with his hair. The previously mentioned Sati was reborn as Parvati, this deity's other consort with whom he fathered Ganesh. Known for his third eye, for 10 points, name this Hindu god whose role is that of a destroyer.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 2644 | QuAC I | 2008 | Round: RoundExtra.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 28611

Question: Before undertaking his greatest feat, he ordered the Ubshu-kenna to submit to his authority if he was successful. On the E-Sagil Ziggurat, this figure is depicted as a snake-dragon holding a hoe-like tool called the marrn. His "majestic halo" and fierce glance killed Kingu, and then he sent a mighty wind into Kingu's consort, killing her and making of her ribs the vault of the heavens and earth. For 10 points, name this Babylonian deity, the slayer of the sky dragon Tiamat.

ANSWER: Marduk

Result: 2645 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 28623

Question: Varagna is a falcon owned by this god. The Kolovrat is a swastika-like symbol that represents this god, and this god is credited with inventing monogamous marriage. One son of this god has a bird-shaped helmet and helps with the corn harvest. Another son of this god is married to Lada the goddess of merriment and is depicted as a man with horns and a dog's head who rides through the sky in a chariot; that son is Dazhbog the sun god. The Russian historian Boris Rybakov claimed that this god was one of the four aspects of Svantevit, the chief god of the Wends, but that view is heterodox. Deeds of this god included slaying Zmey, a great dragon, as well as creating the sun and putting it in the sky. One son of this god slays the storm-causing serpent Veles; that son is the god of thunder and is named Perun. For ten points, name this Slavic god of smithery and fire.

ANSWER: Svarog [accept Swarog or Svarozits; accept Schwayxtix from Sorbs; do not accept "Svarozic", who is a different god altogether] {BA}

Result: 2646 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 28629

Question: This name is attached to a number of figures from Greek myth of whom the least well known was probably the only surviving daughter of Zeus and Lamia before the latter went insane over the death of her other children and became a demonic spirit that kills babies. Another was turned into an egret when she drowned swimming alongside the ship of a man she loved and whose affections she had purchased by cutting a purple lock of her father's hair, leading to that father's death. Ovid connects that one with the most famous one, a daughter of Phorcys for whom Glaucus rejected either Amphitrite or Circe, leading to her being cursed to have a human upper body but with barking dogs' heads coming from her vagina. For 10 points give this common name, applied bother to the unlucky daughter of King Nisus and to the monster in the Strait of Messina alongside Charybdis.

ANSWER: Scylla {WD, SK}

Result: 2647 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 28631

Question: This being has two souls, named Aramitama and Sigimitama. Another son of this being is called Oh-Magatsumi, or "The Great Evil-Doer", and he is also the father of the sorcerer Okuni-Nshino. This being once used a necklace of beads to create five new male deities, which he claimed were his children, though the owner of the necklace also claimed parentage. One story about this being says he was so sad at being separated from his mother that he cried until his beard reached his breast. This being once ordered Okuni-Nushi to sleep in a room full of centipedes. This being once turned his fiancee, a native of Izumo province and daughter of Ashinazuchi named Kushinada-hime, into a comb so he could carry her around. This being once used eight vats of sake he hid behind eight gates as part of a plan to defeat an enemy with eight heads. That foe, Yamata-no-Orochi, also had eight tails, the fourth of which contained Kusanagi, this being's sword. For ten points, name this kami of the sea and storms that destroyed the rice fields of Amateratsu and made her hide in a cave.

ANSWER: Susano'o [accept: Susanowo, Susanoto, Susa-no-o-no-mikoto] {BA}

Result: 2648 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 28633

Question: In some sources, this god is said to be the son of Mistarblindi. This god was said to live in the land of Cattegat, also known as Hlesey, leading to his alternative name of Hler. Snorri identifies this god with the mountain god Gymir in the Skaldskaparmal, which is formatted as a dialog between this god and Bragi. The goddess Angeyja is one of this god's children, through whom he may be the grandfather of Heimdall. This son of Fornjotr is a brother of Kari and Logi, the gods of wind and fire, and he is married to the pale theft goddess Ran, with whom he has nine daughters known as the Billow Maidens. This god's hall is home to a magic cauldron given to him by Thor in which this god brews ale and contains the servants Eldir and Fimafeng, the latter of whom was killed when this god hosted a feast crashed by Loki. That hall is filled with gold this deity collected from shipwrecks. For ten points, name this Norse god of the sea.

ANSWER: Aegir [accept Hler or Gymir until mentioned] {BA}

Result: 2649 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 1.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 28635

Question: According to the Vedas, this god created a golden egg by throwing his seed into the ocean, resulting in the birth of Narayana. One story of this god's birth states that he sprang directly from the heart of Brahma. The blossoms of the damanaka tree are offered to this god. This god is the father of Sraddha, the goddess of faith, and Dharma, the god of justice. This god's companions include a cuckoo and the flower goddess Vasanta. The New Year festival Holi was originally dedicated to this god, though it now honors Krishna. This god's consort is Rati, his mount is a parrot, and he makes weapons out of bee stings. In one story, this god's death leads to the creation of the six-headed god of war, Kartikaya, also called Murugan. This god was incinerated by a stream of fire from Shiva's third eye after shooting an arrow that caused Shiva and Parvati to fall in love. For ten points, name this Hindu god of love, who lends his name to an infamous sutra.

ANSWER: Kamadeva [accept: Manmatha] {BA}

Result: 2650 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 1 | Mythology | ID: 28638

Question: Among the Lithuanians, the demon Aitvaras is said to appear as this type of creature when he is indoors. Some early Athenian vase paintings contain images of a curious creature with the forequarters of a horse and the hindquarters of this type of creature. Ares transformed a youth into one of these creatures after that youth failed to prevented Helios from walking in on Ares sleeping with Aphrodite. In the Epic of Sundiata, the evil wizard Sumangaru can only be harmed by a body part of this animal. One of these creatures is vulnerable only to the rod Haevatein, which is owned by Loki, and has two meals and a sickle hidden under its wings. Fjalar is one of these creatures who lives among the frost giants, and the most famous one of these from Norse mythology is named for a body part of his that is made of gold. For ten points, Vidofnir and Gullinkambi are these kinds of creatures, whose crowing will signal Ragnorak.

ANSWER: cocks [accept: roosters; prompt on "chickens", do not accept "hens"] {BA}

Result: 2651 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 28640

Question: Later authors claim that this man received ill-will from his father after he and his younger brother used a forbidden silver table and golden cup, as well as sending his father the leg of a sacrificed animal rather than the shoulder. This figure's wife was a daughter of Amphithea, a princess of Argos named Argea, and this man's son Thersander was killed by Telephus while king of Thebes. After this man was expelled from his home city, he enlisted the help of such figures as Capaneus, Parthenopeus, and Adrastus, and he ultimately died at his brother's hands when they simultaneously threw spears at each other. The regent Creon prevented this man's corpse from being touched, though it was eventually sprinkled with dust. FTP, name this son of Oedipus and Jocasta and brother of Eteocles, whose burial by his sister led to conflict in Sophocles' Antigone.

ANSWER: Polynices {WD}

Result: 2652 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 28643

Question: These peoples believed in a goddess of immortality named Evan. Their underworld was guarded by a scissors-wielding female demon with a torch and a hammer-wielding male demon with pointy ears and snakes for arms. Apart from Culsu and Charun, they also believed in a winged female demon who guided the dead to the underworld named Vanth, while Aita was their Lord of the Underworld. Turms was the messenger of the Gods among these people. These peoples worshiped Fufluns, the god of plant matter and wine. Selvans was the god of boundaries, while Tinia and Uni were the king and queen of the gods. These peoples worshipped Nethuns, a god of the sea they borrowed from the neighboring Umbrians. Historic kings of these people include Lars Porsena and their cities include Veii. For ten points, name these non-Indo-European peoples who lived north of the Romans.

ANSWER: Etruscans [accept: Rasenna, Rasna, Etrusci, Tusci, Tyrrhenioi, Tyrrhenians] {BA}

Result: 2653 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 28644

Question: The meaning of the Gaulish personal name Epomeduos is used as evidence that the Celts practiced this ritual. Among the Romans, this ceremony was performed on the Ides of October and was dedicated to Mars. Among the Norse, this ceremony is described in the Hervarar saga, where it is performed by Blot-Sweyn, and in the Volsa Thattr, where it is practiced by phallus-worshipers. Among the Hindus, this ceremony was described in the Yajurveda, involved the ritual uttering of obscene words by a group of women, and involved the sacrifice of a goat that ceremoniously led this ceremony's participants to its location. An Adhvaryu is a Hindu priest who performs this ceremony, which is known as the Ashvamedha. This ceremony typically involved ritual copulation with the animal in question, usually by the queen or king. The animal selected was typically chosen for its swiftness. For ten points, name this prominent feature of early Indo-European religion, which involves the ritual killing of an animal used to pull chariots that says "neigh".

ANSWER: Horse Sacrifice {BA}

Result: 2654 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 28645

Question: The Zoroastrian deity associated with this star defeated a witch known as "Bad Crop" or Duzhyarya, thereafter coming to be known as an agricultural deity. That Zoroastrian deity of this star also worked together with Satavaisa, or Fomalhaut, to bring rains and waters to the seven continents, and famously assumed the forms of a white stallion and a deformed horse to defeat Apausha on the shores of the Varu Karta sea. Later associated with Tiri, or the planet Mercury, the god associated with this star, Tishtrya, is the subject of an entire Yasht in the Avesta. Among the Hindus, this star is associated with Shiva and known as "the deer hunter", while among the Norse it is called "Loki's torch", and the Greeks associated it with an animal owned by Orion that helped him hunt. For ten points, name this star, more commonly known as the brightest star in the night sky, the alpha star of Canis Major

ANSWER: Sirius [accept Tishtrya on early buzz] {CM}

Result: 2655 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 28648

Question: The major temple to this god and his wife was at Tell el-Yahudiyya, where they were worshiped as "the lion twins". Along with three other gods, he forms Banebjedet, the ram-headed god of Mendes. According to one story, this god briefly ruled Egypt, but when he was attacked by the children of Apophis he abdicated in favor of his son, causing the other gods to hold a nine-day farewell feast in honor of this god. One story tells how this god and his wife had a fight that led to the collapse of the Old Kingdom, but then Thoth dressed as a woman and got them back together. That wife is the goddess of moisture and is named Tefnut, with whom this god produced Geb and Nut, the latter of whom this god holds up in the sky. For ten points, name this Egyptian god depicted as a single feather, the god of wind.

ANSWER: Shu {BA}

Result: 2656 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 28650

Question: Inhabitants of this realm include Hraesvelg the giant, and it contains Hvergelmir, a spring which feeds the rivers that surround this realm. In the Tricking of Gylfi, Snorri tells of the journey of Hermod the Brave to this realm, where he encountered the maiden Mothguthr. One resident of this realm killed King Dyggvi. Objects that can be found inside the hall of Eljudnir in this realm include the dish Eljuthnir and the knife Sultr. Servants in this realm include Ganglati and Ganglot. This realm also contains Blikjandabol, a curtain, and can be reached via the Pit of Stumbling. It contains Nastrond, a shore which is hope to Nidhogg the dragon. For ten points, name this part of Niflheim, an abode of the dead named for the daughter of Loki who runs it.

ANSWER: Helheim [prompt on "Niflheim" until mentioned] {BA}

Result: 2657 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 28652

Question: This god is similar to a Mayan deity of kingship known as "God K". This god is called Tepeyollotl when he takes the form of the animal associated with him. The stars of the Great Bear constellation are the footprints left by this god as he tried to approach the polar star. In a ceremony dedicated to this deity, a young man would be treated like a god for one year and then sacrificed. During the creation of the world, this god ripped off the jaw of the monster Cipactli, whose body became the Earth, but not before that monster bit off his foot. This creator of the first dogs is married to Xilonen, the goddess of corn, and this god was depicted with black and orange stripes. He ruled the world of the first sun, but was overthrown and turned into a Jaguar. He is the god of the North and of obsidian and is sometimes nicknamed for the object in his chest. For ten points, name this Lord of the Smoking Mirror, the evil brother of Quetzalcoatl.

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca {BA}

Result: 2658 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 2.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 28656

Question: The main account of this figure comes from the Book of Leinster. One man sent to follow this figure ended up losing his eye after a silver chess piece was thrown at him. This figure had brothers-in-law named Ardan and Ainle who were killed at the Battle of Emain Macha. This figure was raised by Leabharcham, who was once sent to spy on this figure but reported only lies. This figure went to Alba with a son of Usnach, after which they were forced to flee to a remote island. One person in the story of this figure swears oaths that force him to attend many alefests and goes to fight for Ailill and Medb after going into exile in Connacht. After Cathbad's prophecy was fulfilled and Eogan slew Naoise, this figure was captured by Conchobar, who intended to forcibly marry this figure. The death of this figure came from leaping out of a chariot, or possibly from grief. For ten points, name this figure from the Ulster cycle, the most beautiful woman in Ireland and causer of many sorrows.

ANSWER: Deirdre {BA}

Result: 2659 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 28660

Question: This being's sister, Kapo, has a detachable vagina that can fly, and that was once used to confuse the hog-headed god Kamapua, who was attempting to capture this deity. This being is sometimes seen carrying an egg, which is actually this being's sister, Hiiaka, and this being's oldest brother is the god of sharks. In most stories, this being's mother is Haumea, while this being's father may be Moemoe or Wakea. One story involves this being searching for a home by digging holes, stopping only upon the formation of a hole that is both sufficiency deep and that does not flood with water. Visitors to this deity's abode who take home rocks may find themselves cursed with misfortune according to a 20th century tradition about this deity, whose hair lends its name to a type of glass ejecta. For ten points, name this Hawaiian goddess of fire and volcanoes.

ANSWER: Pele {BA}

Result: 2660 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 28663

Question: In the Jamasp Namag, one figure spends thirty years riding this being, preventing him from taking any action. Priests who serve this being are known as Usij, Kavis, or Karapans. In one story, this being creates a giant lizard that attempts to destroy the Gaokerena Tree. In another story, this being is defeated by Tishtryra, who foils this being's attempt to stop the rains. This being created Azi Dahaka, also called Zahhak, a great serpent. Zauri, who kills plants, is one of the six major lackeys of this being, who also include Saurva the oppressor and Akoman the Lord of Evil Thoughts. Jeh or Mashye is a whore associated with this being, and this being killed Gayomart, the first human. For ten points, name this leader of the daevas, a son of Zurvan who is associated with evil in Zoroastrianism.

ANSWER: Ahriman [accept: Angra Mainyu] {BA}

Result: 2661 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 28664

Question: One group of these peoples believed in Laume, a goddess of orphans and birth, and Ganiklis, the god of herdsmen. Another group of these peoples worshiped Meness, a moon god, and Auseklis, a god of the dawn. A folk tale from these peoples tells how the maiden Egle fell in love with the serpent prince Zilvinas, but when the townspeople kill Zilvinas she turns herself into a tree. Traditions among these peoples, who revered the Earth goddess Zemes or Zemyna, include using grass-dwelling snakes to divine the future. One tribe from this group of peoples killed St. Adalbert when he attempted to convert them to Christianity; later efforts to Christianize these worshipers of the thunder god Perkuns or Perkunas were made by the Brotherhood of the Sword, and one group of them stayed pagan until the conversion of Jogaila. For ten points, name this ethno-linguistic group that includes Old Prussians, Latvians, and Lithuanians, close relatives of the Slavs named for the sea they live by.

ANSWER: Baltic Peoples [accept: Balts; grudgingly accept "Lithuanians" until "Meness"] {BA}

Result: 2662 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 28667

Question: The Chaldeans called this god Hoa. Under the names Dunga and Lumha he was the god of singers and psalmists, while another of his names, Ninigiku, translates as "King of the Sacred Eye". This god has a son who acts as his mediator to mortals named Asari. This god has a servant named Isimud, who has two faces, and this god once turned the dirt under his fingernails into Galaturra and Kurgarra, two demons of ambiguous gender. One of this god's titles is "Lord of Semen", and his daughter Uttu was born from an incestuous affair this god had with his older daughter Ninkurra, though his primary consort is Ninhursag. This god cast a spell on his father causing him to go into a deep sleep, letting this god rule a giant underground ocean. Part of a triad with Anu and Enlil, for ten points name this father of Marduk, the Mesopotamian god of water.

ANSWER: Ea [accept: Enki] {BA}

Result: 2663 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 28670

Question: This god is the brother-in-law of the giant Thjasse-Volund, who once forged the Sword of Victory in an attempt to conquer Asgard. This god once carved runes onto the sun, shaved them off, and sent a portion of the shavings to each major race of Norse myth. This god's wife was once chased by the giant Thiassi. Loki claimed that this god's wife was the most man-crazed of women, accusing her of sleeping with the man who killed her brother. That wife is also charged with keeping the apples of eternal youth. Snorri referred to this god as "the long bearded". Apart from being married to Idunn, this god also owns a cup by which the gods swear oaths, and he greets newcomers to Valhalla. For ten points name this Norse god of bards and poetry.

ANSWER: Bragi {BA}

Result: 2664 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 28672

Question: Callimachus identifies Phasis as the king of these beings, and other examples of this type of creature include the father of Aegina, one called Simoeis, who inhabited the area around Troy, and Caicus and Termessus, who also inhabited Asia Minor. One of these entertains such figures as Lelex and Theseus in Ovid's Metamorphoses, and in Greek art, they were represented either as a man-headed bull, a bull-horned man with the body of a fish, or a man reclining pouring out an amphora. One of these figures was the father with Liriope of Narcissus, and one of these assaults Achilles until Hephaestus comes to his aid, while others included the father of Io and a pursuer of Arethusa. Cephissus, Inachus, and Alpheus were members of the three thousand of these beings who were the offspring of Oceanus and Tethys. FTP, name these entities, better known examples of which included Achelous, Scamander, Nilus, and Tiberinus, who personified the Tiber.

ANSWER: rivers {WD}

Result: 2665 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 28676

Question: In Tibetan Buddhism, this god is the guardian of the Southeast. This god is also invoked during the Buddhist homa ritual. In Yoga, this god is associated with the concept of kundalini. This god is known as the "thrice-born" because he has equal power in the air, the sky, and the Earth, though when this god takes the form of Grhapati he is constantly born and reborn. In one story, this god is discovered by Yama when Varuna organizes an expedition to find this god, who was hiding in the water. This three-legged god is sometimes called Saptajihva, which refers to his seven heads and seven tongues, which he uses to lick the butter frequently sacrificed to him. This consort of svaha rides a ram, and his temples are home to his namesake drills, and worship of him may involve using friction to generate sparks. For ten points, name this Hindu god of sacrifices and fire.

ANSWER: Agni {BA}

Result: 2666 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 28677

Question: This figure once followed a white boar and thus became stuck in an otherworldly castle until the god of the sea devised a solution by catching a mouse who was actually the wife of Llwyd; this incident is known as the Spell of the Golden Bowl. This figure has magical birds that can wake the dead and put the living to sleep and once used a magic bag to escape an unwanted marriage. Her son was raised by King Teyrnon and her second marriage was to the god Manawydan. Puppy blood to used to frame this ex-wife of Pwyll when her son Pryderi was kidnapped by monsters, forcing her to carry visitors on her back. For ten points, name this Welsh goddess who is forced to act as a horse after being wrongly accused of killing her son.

ANSWER: Rhiannon {BA}

Result: 2667 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 3.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 28678

Question: According to Nonnus, the Cabiroi are the offspring of this god. This god is often depicted riding on a donkey. According to one story, this god gave a boy named Cedalion to the hunter Orion. Small dwarf-like statues of this god were often placed at a certain location in Greek homes. Some suggest that this god was born by Hera alone because of her jealousy over Zeus' bearing of Athena. An object associated with this god as used to bribe Eriphyle, while another object originally possessed by this god was stolen from Zeus by Pandareus. Homer credits this god with being married to Charis, or "Grace". One story tells of this god being nursed by Thetis and the Oceanids at Lemnos after he was twice thrown from Olympus, and this god is credited with creating Pandora. For ten points, name this husband of Aphrodite who crafted Achilles' armor and Zeus' thunderbolts, the Greek god of fire.

ANSWER: Hephaestus {WD}

Result: 2668 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 28683

Question: This figure's offspring are said to include a goddess of ghosts, Melinoe, as well as a goddess of afterlife, Macaria. This figure was responsible for the transformation of Minthe into a mint plant, and Plutarch and a scholiast on Pindar claim that this figure was a parent of the god Zagreus, who was often identified with Dionysus. Ovid recounts that the nymph Cyane floated this figure's girdle to the top of her spring to prove her existence, and a son of Acheron was responsible for condemning her, and was changed into a screech owl, the creature Ascalaphus. This lover of Adonis was snatched by her husband while picking flowers with some Oceanids, and was forced to stay in her husbands' abode after eating four, seven, or eight seeds. For ten points, name this goddess who was allowed to return to her distraught mother for eight months out of every year, a daughter of Zeus and Demeter.

ANSWER: Persephone [accept: Proserpina]

Result: 2669 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 28685

Question: In one story, this man crushes some chess pieces into dust after being attacked by the ravens of one of his followers; that story is narrated by his messenger Iddawg and turns out to be a three-day dream. That tale is recounted in The Dream of Rhonabwy. One story about this man details an expedition he led to fortress of Annwfn to retrieve a magical cauldron. This man owned the shield Priwen and the spear Ron, and he used a law made by Bishop Brice to come to power. In another story, this man leads a quest to discover the daughter of the giant Ysbaddaden Pencawr at the behest of the man she is to marry. This man's allies include King Hoel, as well as Ban and Bohort. This star of Culhwch and Olwen won the Battle of Mount Badon but at the Battle of Camlan he is killed, despite possessing Caliburn, his sword. For ten points, name this cousin of Mordred who pulled a sword from a stone.

ANSWER: King Arthur {BA}

Result: 2670 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 28688

Question: In one story, this being is sent to recover a ball and a mallet that had fallen into a hole in the ground, but because he wears perfume and expensive clothes he is captured as an intruder. Later in that story, this being notes that it is good to have many sons, as they will make offerings to for you when you are in the underworld. Elsewhere, the appearance of this being is compared to the gods Sumukan and Ashnan, whose tastes in hair and fashion he seems to share, and this being may be as strong as a meteorite of Anu. This being, who once interpreted five dreams as good omens, is given a pendant when he visits the Egalmah Temple to see Ninsun, a great queen. This being fashions a great door out of cedar after participating in the slaying of Humbaba. Shamat is a temple prostitute who sleeps with this being, who, despite the pleas of Shamash, is killed by the gods for slaying the Bull of Heaven. For ten points, name this wild-man of Mesopotamian myth, the best friend of Gilgamesh.

ANSWER: Enkidu {BA}

Result: 2671 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 28690

Question: This being owned a bull that was really the god Dharma in disguise. This being himself turned into a bull to avoid committing incest, and his consort once turned into a she-goat. According to one story, this being had ten surviving children and fifty other children who killed each other in quarrels. A Smriti supposedly written by this being contains a set of social codes for different castes that are known as this being's laws. This being met Matsya, a constantly-growing fish that turned out to be an avatar of Vishu, who instructed this being to build a great boat, allowing him to survive a great flood. For ten points, name this first man from Hindu tradition, who shares his name with a San Antonio Spurs player from Argentina.

ANSWER: Manu {BA}

Result: 2672 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 28691

Question: In addition to being the patron of coppersmiths, the god Hadur held this role in Hungarian paganism. Among the Fijians, Samulayo serves this role. The Maori god with this role is said to have angered the wind god, who punished him by creating the hurricanes that plague mankind to this day. Apart from Tumatauenga, this role was held by the goddess Ankt in Egyptian mythology, and sometimes by the goddess who spat out Apophis, Nieth. The forest god Cocidius and his associate Belatu-Cadros held this role among the insular Celts, while Camulus held this role among the Gauls. The Aztec god with this role was born after his mother was impregnated with a ball of feathers. Greek goddesses with this role include Enyo. The Hindu deity with this role rides a peacock and is sometimes called Subrahmanya or Karttikeya. For ten points, name this role shared by Murugan, Huitzilopochtli, and Ares.

ANSWER: God of War {BA}

Result: 2673 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 28692

Question: This god is credited as the father of Sinis, a forest-dwelling giant who was slain by Theseus. This god impregnated Chione, a daughter of Boreas, siring his son Eumolpus. The monster ketos was sacred to this deity. This deity took the form of a bull to impregnate Arne, and he had three sons named Actor, Belus, and Dictys by Agamede. Through his son Agenor, this god is the grandfather of Europa. This deity was raised by the Telchines on the isle of Rhodes. With Euryale, this god sired the man who would rape Merope, the great hunter Orion. As part of a contest, this god used his spear to create a spring, but his rival Athena created an olive tree, which was deemed more useful, and thus won naming rights to Athens. This god is also credited with giving men the gift of horses, and he is married to Amphitrite. For ten points, name this Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon [accept: Neptune] {BA}

Result: 2674 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 28694

Question: According to a tossup at 2004 ACF Nationals, this figure is "comparable in many ways to Santa Clause". This figure's name may be partially derived from a word for "robber fly", and one story of this figure's birth says that he was born when an eagle shot an arrow into an insect. Another theory is that this figure represents a traveling merchant. Among the Taos and Acoma peoples, this figure carries a bag of presents on his back, but other peoples see him as carrying songs or seeds. This figure is frequently depicted as a kachina doll. Girls are told to avoid bathing in the river because of this figure, who may impregnate them by use of his detachable phallus. For ten points, name this trickster god of the American southwest, depicted as a hunched-over man playing a flute.

ANSWER: Kokopelli {BA}

Result: 2675 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 4.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 28699

Question: The daughters of Hymir once urinated into the mouth of this green tunic-wearing god. In the Lokasenna this god criticized Loki for having children out of wedlock, after which Loki accused him of incest. This god's father-in-law Thiassi was killed by the Aesir, leading to this god's marriage. This god's wife resides in Thrymheimr. This god was exchanged for Hoenir and Mimir when he was a hostage during the Vanir-Aesir war. As a weather god, this deity is responsible for causing sunsets by putting out the fires of day. This god owns the hall Noatun, and he was mistaken for Baldur because of his beautiful feet by his future wife Skadi. For ten points, name this leader of the Vanir and father of Frey and Freya.

ANSWER: Njord [accept: Njordr] {BA}

Result: 2676 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 28702

Question: In one work, this figure is attacked by a man who claims his name is "Hart". In the work he is most associated with, this being, who is described as having a long arm and an audacious soul, is not seen until after Lyngi, Hjorward, and the other sons of Hunding have died. After this being is wounded, he discusses the location of Ragnorak and the nature of the norns with his attacker, who at first refuses to reveal his name. This being's brother died while salmon fishing when a stone was thrown at him. The objects owned by this being, which had been acquired by using the net of Ran to capture a pike, included the Helm of Awe and Hrotti and Ridill, two swords. Those objects had previously been owned by Andvari, who had cursed them. As this being crossed a ditch, a sword was plunged into the body of this son of Hriedmar and brother of Otter and Regin; that sword was named Gram. For ten points, name this dwarf-turned-dragon slain by Sigurd.

ANSWER: Fafnir {BA}

Result: 2677 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 28711

Question: Ovid's Heroides recounts that this man threw himself from the Leucadian cliff to cure himself of love for his wife, and Pausanius lists this man as the king of Ozolion Locris and the father of Orestheus. Another figure of this name succeeded to the throne after Althaemenes murdered his father Catreus, and that figure was the father of the husband of Meda, the Cretan king Idomeneus. Robert Graves suggests that the more famous figure of this name was once a wine-god before the coming of Dionyos, hence his name, which is Greek for "New Wine Sailor". Children of this man and his wife included Hellen and Protogenea, and this man was the grandfather of Aelous, Dorus, and Xuthus. This ruler of Phthia eventually settled atop Mt. Parnassus, and after an incident caused indirectly by Lycaon, this man recognized the earth as his mother and cast stones over his shoulder, which grew into men. FTP, name this figure and son of Prometheus, the only man spared during the great flood, who repopulated the earth with his wife

ANSWER: Deucalion {WD, SK}

Result: 2678 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 28714

Question: According to Hesiod's Theogany, the Titan associated with this animal was a consort of Eurybia and father of Astraeus and Pallas, the Titan Crius. One of these animals was used in a famous ritual for blessing land by the Romans alongside a bull and a pig, the so-called "Suovetairilia". To protect him from Hera's wrath Zeus temporarily turned Dionysos into one of these and left him in the care of the nymphs of Mount Nysa. After coupling with Poseidon in the form of one of these the the nymph Theophane gave birth to one of these creatures. This creature was sacrificed to Jupiter on the Ides of every month by the Flamen Dialis in Rome, and a Greek deity worshipped at Meroe, Zeus Ammon, had the head of this creature. For ten points, name this type of animal, which includes Chrysomallus who rescued Phrixus and Helle and whose golden fleece was sought by Jason in Colchis.

ANSWER: Ram [prompt on "sheep"] {WD, SK}

Result: 2679 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 28715

Question: In the Atharva Veda, a sorcerer's spell is compared to a dead one of these animals, and Rohini is mentioned as a god of these animals who helps prevent jaundice. The Atharva Veda also contains a story about the god Pushan giving one thousand of these animals as a gift to those who make sacrifices, and about one of these creatures who gave birth to twins and became a cannibal, but stopped after being given to a Brahman. In the Rig Veda, the river goddesses Vipas and Sutudri are compared to these animals for taking care of humans in a manner analogous to how these creatures take care of their young. Surabhi, also known as Khamadhenu, is one of these creatures that has to power to grant any wish. To escape from Vishnu, the Earth goddess Prithvi changed into a white one of these creatures. Gober is the Sanskrit term for the excrement of this animal, which is used for medicine and fertilizer, and these animals also produce ghee. For ten points, name this large land mammal that cannot be eaten by Hindus, to whom it is sacred, known for producing milk and saying "moo".

ANSWER: cow [prompt on "cattle"; under no circumstances accept "bull", the first clue applies only to cows] {BA}

Result: 2680 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 28717

Question: This god was the patron of the Twelfth and Thirteenth Dynasties, though the Eighteenth Dynasty built a large temple to him where the animal whose head he has was kept and fed. This god invented a trap that restored the severed hands of Horus, and in the book of the dead he assists in the birth of Horus. The Greeks depicted this god with a halo of solar rays, since they considered him a form of Helios. In Ptolemaic times, this god was the father of Khonsu, though earlier he was considered childless. Major temples to this god were at Gebel el-Silsila, Gebelein, Dehamsha, and Kom Ombo, but the largest was located in the Faiyum region at Shedat, also called Arsinoe, which the Greeks eventually renamed for the animal this god is associated with. At death, this god was believed to prevent decay of the body, and he was considered the repairer of evil that had been done. Because he was a god of the royal army, this deity was depicted with a uraeus, the Egyptian symbol of kingship. This deity eventually became a fertility god because of his close association with the Nile, though he originally represented one of its most dangerous animals. For ten points, name this Egyptian god with the head of a crocodile.

ANSWER: Sobek [accept: Sebek, Sebekhetep, Suchos, Petesuchos] {BA}

Result: 2681 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 5.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 28718

Question: In the Lokasenna, Loki's insult of this deity, who was once married to Orvandil, causes mountains to shake, and earlier in that work this deity claimed to be the only blameless member of the Aesir. Snorri associates this deity with Hildr, who has the power to revive the dead on battlefields, and claims that this deity's children include Loridi and the crafty magician Ullr. The dwarf Alviss is a future son-in-law to this deity because he is engaged to this deity's daughter Thurd. This deity has the power to transform into a swan, and more notable children of this goddess were Modi and Magni. This deity's most famous possession was the first object made by the sons of Ivaldi after a prank where Loki shaved this deity. For ten points, name this Norse goddess with gold hair, the wife of Thor.

ANSWER: Sif {BA}

Result: 2682 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 28727

Question: One legend tells how the men of this city acquired their notoriously small buttocks from the misadventures of one of their kings. The last legendary ruler of this city disguised himself as a peasant and provoked an enemy camp, fulfilling a prophecy and saving the city from harm, while another leader of this city failed to return to his wife, who killed herself and was changed into an almond tree. In addition to Codrus and Demophon, another legendary king of this city killed a prince of Crete leading to an expedition during which his son was supposedly killed. Figures hailing from this city include Pandion, Procne, and Philomela, and its founder was said to be half-man and half-snake. One prince of this city forget to change his ship's black sails to white, which resulted in his father jumping from the cliffs giving the nearby Aegean Sea its name. The location of a contest of patronage in which a salt-water spring and an olive tree were both created, for ten points name this important city home to Cecrops, Aegeus, and Theseus and named after the goddess of wisdom.

ANSWER: Athens {WD}

Result: 2683 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 28731

Question: Some gestures to appease this figure included throwing brandy into fires and a man named Charles Janvier was one of the few alleged white victims of one of these. Atchen and Chinoo are other names for this figure whose heart is often made of ice and can usually be destroyed with fire. This being is known for making hissing noises, and Jack Fiddler was an early 20th century Canadian who claimed to have killed fourteen of these creatures. Humans can be possessed by them either after going mad through isolation or being bitten by one, which results in a condition similar to lycanthropy. Though always emaciated with sallow, yellowish skin, this being grows larger as it consumes more but is never satisfied with anything other than human flesh. For ten points, identify this legendary cannibalistic being of the Algonquin Indian mythology.

ANSWER: The Wendigo [accept: Windigo, Weendigo, Windago, Windiga, Witiko, Wihtikow, Wee-Tee-Go. Accept Atchen and Chinoo before mention] {CC}

Result: 2684 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 28735

Question: The oldest known depiction of this god was found south of el-Lisht at Tarkhan and shows him without limbs. The highest-ranking priest in this god's temple had the title of Wer Kherep Hemewet, or "Great Controller of Craftsmen". In Ptolemaic times, it became fashionable to depict this male god as having female breasts. This god was sometimes syncretized with Tatanen, the god of land. This god is said to be short and frequently mistaken for a child. This father of Nefertum is depicted with a weight hanging from his shoulders, a beard, and a skullcap, and typically as green-skinned and mummified. A powerful form of this god consists of him combined with Sokar and Osiris. This god's name means "one who fashions", and in Memphis he was the head of the Ennead. For ten points, name this Egyptian creator god who made the world from a primordial mound.

ANSWER: Ptah [accept: Peteh] {BA}

Result: 2685 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 28736

Question: On his sarcophagus, King Pacal claims to be the living manifestation of these figures, one of whom appears in a separate story as a great hunter of deer. In one story, these figures make an old woman laugh by transforming two characters into monkeys; earlier, they had tricked those characters into trying to climb to the top of a tree that was constantly growing taller. One enemy of these figures dies of shame after losing his false teeth, which were made out of gems. These figures used a crab lure to trap and kill one enemy, who had earlier killed four hundred warriors and turned them into stars. They also defeated the villainous lord of Earthquakes. Apart from Cabrakan and Zipacna, their most notable foe tried to use darkness, coldness, bats, and razors against these figures, but they defeated that Lord of Xibalba in a ball game. For ten points, name these heroes of the Popol Vuh, two brothers who are either fraternal or identical.

ANSWER: Mayan Hero Twins [accept: Hunahpuh and Xbalanque or Hun Ahaw and Yax Balam until mentioned] {BA}

Result: 2686 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 28737

Question: In the Ynglinga Saga, this deity is credited with teaching magic to the Aesir. According to the Halfs Saga, this deity once lost to Odin in a vicarious ale-brewing contest. Alternative names for this deity include Gefn and Mardoll, which means "one who shines over the seas". This deity, who may occasionally be disguised as Gondul, has a daughter named Hnoss, and some writers say this deity is married to the mortal Od. This deity's hall Sessrumnir is part of the palace of Folkvang. This deity, who had a relationship with a human named Ottar and was desired by the giant Blast, owns Hildesvini the boar, as well as a magical cloak made of falcon feathers. After sleeping with four dwarves, this master of the servant Fulla acquired Brisingamen, a necklace. For ten points, name this owner of a chariot driven by gib-cats, a Vanir who is the Norse goddess of love and fertility.

ANSWER: Frejya [accept: Freya; accept Gefn or Mardoll until mentioned] {BA}

Result: 2687 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 6.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 28738

Question: This figure received a beautiful and sagacious dog from Belinda, who killed herself because this man did not return her love. He defeated Sir Palamedes, a Saracen knight who was inexplicably attending a tournament in Ireland, though he later rescues Palamedes from the eight knights of Sir Breuse the Pitiless. The squire Gouvernail helped raised this son of Meliadus and Isabella, who had a friend named Pheredin. This man once rode in the woods for ten days before rescuing a knight about to be beheaded by three other knights, who turned out to be King Arthur. Through the carelessness of Brangaine, this slayer of Morholt had an affair with his uncle's fiancee and eventually died after seeing black sails. For ten points, name this Cornish folk hero and Knight of the Round Table who ingests a love potion and tragically falls for Isoude.

ANSWER: Sir Tristan of Lyonesse [accept: Tristram, Tristrem, Tramtis] {BA}

Result: 2688 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 28745

Question: During the Gigantomachy, this deity slew Mimas. By Demonice, this god may be the father of the river-god Evenus. This god's sons include the man who raped Philomea, Tereus, and another one of this god's sons was turned into the swan Cygnus. This god was once kidnapped by the Aloadae, two brothers who were also giants, who chained this god to the inside of an urn until he was rescued by Hermes. One of this man's daughters was slain by Achilles at Troy; that daughter was Penthesilea, and Diomedes once wounded this god, whose other daughters include Hippolyta. This god's sisters include Hebe, the goddess of youth, and he is also the brother of Hephaestus, all of whom were born of Zeus and Hera. For ten points, name this father of Phobos and Deimos, the Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares [accept: Mars] {BA}

Result: 2689 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 28746

Question: This figure once pretended to have an argument with his wife over how strong a python was in order to capture that python by tying him to a pole; and after also capturing a leopard in a pit trap and some hornets in a gourd, this son of Asase Ya gave those creatures to the sky god Nyame in exchange for ownership of all the stories in the world. Another story tells how this figure attempted to hoard all the wisdom of mankind in a gourd, but this was foiled by a turtle, whom this figure had angered by refusing to share a meal. Another storty tells how this figure was beaten by a mob after getting stuck following his encounter with the wax girl. For ten points, name this West African trickster god, whose name means "spider".

ANSWER: Compe Anansi [accept: Kwaku Anansi or Aunt Nancy or Nansi or Mr. Nancy] {BA}

Result: 2690 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 28748

Question: In one story, this deity advises King Enmerkar to send a herald to the land of Aratta and ask for tribute in order to build the Apsu ziggurat; that story concerns this deity's decision to give the city of Uruk hegemony over its neighbors. This deity once made the vizier Papsukaal tear out his hair. Another story relates how this deity was chased up a river by the Abgallu, or sea monsters. That happened after this deity stole the mes, or knowledge, of another deity. The introduction to the Code of Hamurabi notes that Hamurabi causes joy in the heart of this deity. The cult of this deity involved the use of gala priests. Shukaletuda was a gardener who hid from this deity after he was sent to care for a date tree and instead sexually assaulted this deity. This deity once attended the funeral of Gudgalana. Rejecting the advances of this deity may result in an attack from the bull of heaven, and to test Tammuz this deity once went into the underworld, which is ruled by her sister. For ten points, name this Mesopotamian goddess of love, who has a titular gate in Babylon.

ANSWER: Ishtar [accept Inanna; prompt on "Astarte"] {BA}

Result: 2691 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 28751

Question: The crafty wizard Oller, also known as Uller or Ollerus, briefly replaced this god in the pantheon before this god returned and chased Oller away to Sweden. Once source claims that this god has two wives, Gritta and Grydat. Tools used by this god, who knows eighteen magical songs, include the tusk Rati. This god sometimes dwells in the hall of Valaskjalf, where he sits on his chair Hlidskjalf. This god either turned into a snake or into the farmhand Bolverk in order to get close to the giantess Gunnolth. This lives at the abode of Gladsheim, where he may have slept with Rind to produce his son Vali, and he obtained Odraerir, a beverage made from the blood of the wise giant Kvasir that is said to be the beverage of poets. For ten points, name this father of Vidar and husband of Frigg, who drank from the well of Mimir to become wise, the one-eyed leader of the Norse gods.

ANSWER: Odin [accept: Othin, Othinus, Ouvin, Votan, Wotan, Wodin, Wodinaz, Ygg] {BA}

Result: 2692 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 28753

Question: This being's dog was described as "better than any other property" and as "the hound of mightiest deeds". He was raised by Manannan, the god of the sea. He avenged his father by sending his killers, the sons of Tuireann, on impossible quests that they unexpectedly completed only to die of their wounds. One of his nicknames was "Samildanach", or "the many-skilled". He owned the spear Bionac, which thirsted for blood and wielded itself. This one-time follower of King Nuada slew Balor, his tyrannical grandfather, at the Second Battle of Mag Tuired, where he led the Tuatha De Danann. For his constant fighting of darkness, he eventually became the solar deity and he sired Cuchulainn. For ten points, name this warrior god of Irish mythology.

ANSWER: Lugh [accept Lu] {BA}

Result: 2693 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 28760

Question: This man once won a contest by causing a great wind that shook a castle to its foundations. He had a rival named Heinnin Fardd, whom this man defeated by casting a spell that caused Fardd to speak only gibberish. This man once glanced at a patch of ice and fell into a trance, resulting in a vision where he saw that his master had been thrown into a dungeon. This man once tricked Rhun into cutting off a servant's finger, thus saving the reputation of his master's wife. This man won a race on Dobbin by dropping twigs of holly, which caused the horses of Maelgwn to stop running. Apart from being put into a bag and thrown into the ocean, where he was found by Elphin, his misadventures include being chased by an otter through the river and being eaten by a hen, who was really the witch Ceridwen, his original master. This man drank three drops of a liquid that had been brewed for a year and a day, acquiring his command of language. For ten points, name this foremost bard of Welsh myth.

ANSWER: Taliesin [accept: Merddin, Gwion] {BA}

Result: 2694 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 7.doc | Question: 19 | Mythology | ID: 28761

Question: Karisini is an aspect of this deity associated with dung. This deity is associated with a white elephant named Sri-gaja, and the Atharva Veda describes two deities with this name, one good and one bad. According to the Puranas, this deity was the child of Brighu and Khyati, and the three fires are sometimes said to be the sons of this deity. When grouped with three similar deities, this figure is associated with the color red. The mount of this gold-skinned deity is the owl, and this figure can frequently be seen carrying a lotus flower. Avatars of this deity include Kamala, who was married to a dwarf, and Dharani, who was married to an ax-wielding figure. For ten points, name this Hindu goddess of good fortune who is the consort of Vishnu.

ANSWER: Lakshmi {BA}

Result: 2695 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 2 | Mythology | ID: 28765

Question: He's not Andy Watkins, but one story about this figure tells of him stripping naked in a forest and symbolically tearing out five tufts of his hair. Another story tells how the god Sangama transformed into a venomous serpent in an unsuccessful attempt to frighten this figure, who instead showed no fear. This figure, who was sometimes followed by ten disciples, may have been married to a daughter of Jitashatru named Yashoda, and he once experienced a vision while assuming a cow-milking position, causing him to become omniscent. Parshva and Rishabha are among this man's predecessors, who number twenty-three in total. For ten points, name this most recent Tirthankara, considered the founder of our time-cycle's Jainism.

ANSWER: Mahavira {BA}

Result: 2696 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 28766

Question: When talking to this object, its owner praises it as white and free of stain. Its former owners include Jutmundus the giant and its most notable owner received it from his cousin, an enchanter. This object was made from the same material a similar object named Cortana and owned by Ogier the Dane. This object was supposedly first owned by Hector and was a gift from Malagigi. A sardonyx terrace and a dark stone cause this object to cry out during two attempts to destroy it, both of which fail, and this object is either left under a pine tree or hurled into a poison stream. Containing the tooth of St. Peter and the robe of the Virgin Mary, its owner dies at the Battle of Roncevaux Pass after being ambushed by Saracens. For ten points, name this sword of Roland.

ANSWER: Durandal [accept: Durendal, Durlindana] {BA}

Result: 2697 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 28769

Question: In Hungarian folklore, these creatures are called manok. In 1588, the Scotswoman Allison Peirson was executed for witchcraft after being accused of having conversations with these creatures. A medieval Dutch epic describes Charlemagne meeting one of these creatures, who takes the form of a black knight and exposes Eggeric as a traitor. According to the Yngling Saga, the legendary warrior Olaf Geirstad became one of these creatures after his death. Ottar is a grandson of the king of these creatures; that king may be married to either Bryngerd, the daughter of Raum, or to Svanhild the Gold-Feathered, a daughter of the sun. Skuld and Hegan each had one parent who was this kind of creature. When Frey got his first baby tooth, the realm of these creatures was given to him, and Snorri describes one group of these creatures as being brighter than the sun, while another group is dark-skinned and lives below the Earth; those are known as the "svart" variety. For ten points, name these human-like beings of Norse mythology, frequently depicted with pointy ears.

ANSWER: Elves [accept: Alfar] {BA}

Result: 2698 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 28770

Question: This god is associated with the Hieroglyph for the word sesh. A minor form of this god is depicted as a male goat, and he is sometimes depicted carrying a palm leaf. In The Book of Two Ways, the dead are said to become stars and reside next to this god. In a Ptolemaic-era epic about this god, Neferkaptah and Khaemwaset seek a possession of this god, but experience tragedy when they acquire it. The sound of this god's voice once caused the primordial god Nu, also called Nun, to give birth to additional gods. In another story, he uses magical semen to transform himself into the sun. The Greeks called him "Trismegistos", or "the Thrice Great". He is sometimes considered a moon god or given the head of a baboon, and his deeds include healing other gods. He participates in the judgment of the dead by recording their verdicts. For ten points, name this Ibis-headed Egyptian god of wisdom and writing.

ANSWER: Thoth [accept: Theth, Thout, Tehuti, Djehuty] {BA}

Result: 2699 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 28781

Question: This god has a relationship with the maiden Mayahuel that results in the growth of a beautiful tree when he takes the form of Ehecatl, the wind god. In one story, this god falls into a ditch after being startled by a flock of quail; earlier, he had been aided by worms and bees, who helped him make an instrument out of a conch shell. This god once brought his dwarfs with him on a journey despite knowing that they would be incinerated. This god's rival once disguised himself as the god of war and tricked this god into consuming a magic mushroom that had been given to him in beverage form, after which this god slept with his sister. The planet Venus was associated with this god, who was the Lord of the Dawn, and he ruled Tula before being exiled on a raft of snakes. For ten points, name this feathered serpent god of the Aztecs, not to be confused with Hernando Cortes.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl [accept Ehecatl until mentioned] {BA}

Result: 2700 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 8.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 28783

Question: Among the Iroquois, this animal was associated with the north wind. Andarta and Artio were Celtic goddesses associated with these creatures. According to Saxo Grammaticus, the Danish hero Hialto gained strength and courage after consuming the flesh and blood of one of these creatures. In Hindu tradition, the king of these animals can be harmed only by avatars of Vishnu and is accidentally killed by Krishna; that king, Jamvuman, helps Hanuman and Rama in the Ramayana. Among Tungusic tribes, this animal is captured, kept for several years, and then sacrificed, and the sacrifice of this animal is the central religious ritual of the Ainu peoples of Japan. A nymph who was transformed into one of these creatures gave birth to Arcas after being seduced by Zeus, who was disguised as Artemis; that nymph was Callisto. For ten points, name this type of creature frequently preyed upon by Lions, Vikings, and Packers in the NFC North.

ANSWER: bears [give 5 additional pity points to anyone who answers by singing the words to "Bear Down, Chicago Bears"] {BA}

Result: 2701 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 28788

Question: This deity is celebrated on the First Day of Horse and at Fuigo Matsuri, also known as the Feast of Bellows. One form of this being named Httsu-no-kami is associated with kitchens. This being, whose name is given to a type of sushi with pointed corners, is sometimes conflated with the Boddisatva Dakiniten, who may be a Buddhicized form of the Hindu god Dakini. This patron kami of prostitutes and geishas can be subdivided into other deities including Omiyame, Ukanomitama, and Sarutahiko, who represent water, land, and grain. But this being, who is both male and female, is most closely associated with kitsune, the white foxes used his/her messengers. For ten points, name this Shinto kami of crops, wealth, and good fortune.

ANSWER: Inari {BA}

Result: 2702 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 28792

Question: The snake Kematef is a combination of this god and Min. In one of his shrines, he is depicted as a black phallus, symbolizing his fertility. With his more typical wife Mut, this god adopted Montu, a war god, and Khonsu, a moon god. A large mountain in Kush became associated with this god because it was shaped like an animal sacred to him. This god was sometimes depicted as a seated human whose crown contains two tall plumes. At the Siwa Oasis, Alexander the Great visited an oracle dedicated to this god and afterwards depicted himself with ram horns, a symbol of this ram-headed god who the Greeks combined with Zeus. He was the head of the Ogdoad, and thus the chief god of Thebes. For ten points, name this Egyptian god frequently combined with Ra.

ANSWER: Amun [accept: Amen, Amom, Amum, Atum (but not Atem)] {BA}

Result: 2703 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 28796

Question: This being was once cursed by the nymph Rambha. This being was given the sword Chandrahas and composed hymns known as the Tandavstotra. After this being attempted to pick up Mount Kailash, he spent a thousand years pinned down by the little toe of Shiva. He has a younger brother named Ahi who once ruled the underworld, and an older brother named Dhanapati or Kubera, who is the god of wealth. This being owns Dhadu Morana, a glider. This being has ten tongues, ten faces, and ten necks, which symbolizes his status as one of the world's foremost scholars, and also has twenty hands, symbolizing his greed. The sage Vedavati burned herself because of this being. He is married to Mandodari, and an underling of this being turns into a deer with a human voice as part of this being's most famous plot, where he abducted Sita only to be defeated by Hanuman and an avatar of Vishnu. For ten points, name this evil King of Sri Lanka and chief villain of the Ramayana, the leader of the Rakshasa demons.

ANSWER: Ravana {BA}

Result: 2704 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 13 | Mythology | ID: 28797

Question: Among the San peoples of Africa, it is believed that the first humans sprang from an egg laid by one of these creatures. The Mayan god Ah Muzen Cab was associated with these creatures, and the Aztec god Ahkinshok was the protector of these creatures. The Lithuanians had two deities associated with these creatures: the god Bubilas and the goddess Austeja. The ancient Romans believed that soil from Ireland was fatal to these creatures, and in Brittany these creatures are said to have been born from the tears of Christ, while the Egyptians considered them born from the tears of Ra. An aspect of Devi known as Bhramara is associated with these creatures. The primary goddess of the Minoans was associated with this creature. According to the Greeks, this animal was first domesticated by Aristaeus, who acquired these creatures from the goddess Cyrene. Three of these animals brought Apollo the gift of prophecy, and they were associated with the goddess Merope. Zeus turned Melissa into one of these creatures, while Bernard de Mandeville wrote a "fable" about these creatures as political satire. For ten points, name this insect that can sting and produce honey.

ANSWER: bees {BA}

Result: 2705 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 28798

Question: Under the name of "Dia", this deity was worshiped in a sacred grove at Sicyon and Philus, and the Roman equivalent of this deity was, along with Terminus, one of the two deities that opposed the consecration of the Temple of Jupiter. This deity is said by some to have been conceived parthernogenetically when another goddess ate lettuce, and one story tells of this deity's genetalia being exposed after this deity fell down at a banquet. The Roman equivalent of this deity was offered money when a man put on his first Toga. This deity was rescued from violation at the hands of the giant Pronomus, and children of this deity include Alexiares and Anicetus. Duties of this deity included drawing baths for Ares and attaching horses to the chariot of Hera, this deity's mother. One of this deity's functions was transferred after this deity married a former mortal. For ten points, name this goddess who preceded Ganymede as cup-bearer on Olympus, a goddess of youth who was married to Heracles.

ANSWER: Hebe [accept: Juventas] {SK}

Result: 2706 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round 9.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 28799

Question: To the Otomi and Chichimecs, the Milky Way was the body of one of these creatures named Camaxtli. Gukumatz, a Mayan deity who helps Huracan create the world, takes the form of this animal. During bloodletting rituals, Mayans would attempt to speak to this kind of creature, who might put them into contact with deceased relatives that would crawl out of this creature's mouth. Along with the adjective "turquoise", the name of this animal is given to the weapon of the war god Huitzilopochtli. The goddess of women who die in childbirth, Coatlicue, owns a belt made from these creatures. For ten points, name this animal that was being eaten by an eagle on a cactus at the site where Tenochtitlan was built, a type of reptile with no legs.

ANSWER: snake [accept serpent] {BA}

Result: 2707 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round Finals.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 28808

Question: According to legend this man ousted king Clymenus from Elis. According to Nonnus, this man was an alternate father of Narcissus, and his own lineage lists him as a son of Calyce and either Zeus or Aethlius, the first king of Elis. His daughters included Pandeia, Mesomene, and Meniskos and were part of the fifty Menae. Pausanias wrote that both Herakleia and Olympia claimed the site of this man's burial. This man fathered four sons with his wife Iphianassa before, in some legends, he caught the fancy of Hypnos, though other legends connect him to a daughter of Hyperion and Theia. Currently found on Mt. Latmus, for ten points name this figure, a lover of the moon goddess Selene, who was placed into a state of eternal

ANSWER: Endymion {WD, SK}

Result: 2708 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round Finals.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 28815

Question: This god's son Nabu is the god of speech and language. The Chaldeans believed that this god was the consort of Shala, their goddess of compassion. A major temple to this owner of Abuba and Imhullu is called the "house of the exalted head", or Esaglia. The minister Gaga once prepared a feast for this god, who built an abode called Esharra. As a child, this consort of Zerpanitum was given the winds to play with. One hymn to this god lists his fifty names and his steeds are named Racer, Flyer, Slayer, and Pitiless. This owner of a talking magical cloak took from Kingu the Tablets of Destiny and also defeated the vizier Mummu and his master. For ten points, name this slayer of Tiamat, the chief god of Bablyon.

ANSWER: Marduk {BA}

Result: 2709 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round Finals.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 28817

Question: The ruler of this realm is the father of Sattung, sometimes called Glaur, and the grandfather of Gunlodd. According to Snorri, this realm was the source of energy that caused Ymir to emerge from the Elivagar River. One resident of this realm defeated Loki in an eating contest by consuming bones in addition to flesh. The queen of this realm is named Sinmara or Sinmore. The most famous resident of this realm owns a sword sometimes called the "Sword of Revenge" which can destroy everything except the Hoardmimir Forest and is fated to kill the antler-wielding Freyr at Ragnorak. That resident, Surtr, is also fated to destroy the world by burning it. For ten points, name this realm from Norse myth, the abode of the fire giants.

ANSWER: Muspellheimr {BA}

Result: 2710 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round Finals.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 28819

Question: A type of ritual bath named for this deity involves soaking in milk, aniseed, mustard, and salt and then repeating "I am clean" three times. Epiteths of this god include "the wanderer" and "the one behind the mirror". Monday is sacred to this figure, who is also associated with the color red and number three. This god is married to Adjessi and is associated with a type of bag known as the djakout, This god can be worshiped in either the Petro or Rada rites. The dog is sacred to this figure, who like Charles Meigs can speak every language in the world. Often associated with crossroads, this god is the first and last invoked in a ceremony, because he opens and closes the gate between Earth and the realm of the gods. For ten points, name this major figure from Haitian voodoo, depicted as an old man with a cane and a straw hat.

ANSWER: Papa Legba {BA}

Result: 2711 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round Finals.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 28820

Question: In the Third Lay of Gudrun, Herika claims to have seen this figure sleeping with Gudrun. The Rok Stone calls this man the "Prince of the Maerings" and the "chief of sea-warriors". This man is the subject of an epic also called the "Vilkina Saga", which says that he has a servant named Detlef the Dane and a sword named Nagelring and recounts how he slays the giants Grim and Hild and captures the dwarf Alberich. In another work, a warrior formerly in the service of this man is forced by honor to fight his own son, who doesn't know that the champion he challenged is his father. Apart from being mentioned in the Lay of Hildebrand, this man appears in the Nibelungenlied as an exile in the court of King Etzel, where he captures Hagen and Gunther on behalf of Kriemhild. In real life, this man's companions included the philosopher Boethius, who was this man's magister. For ten points, name this King of the Ostrogoths who became a common subject of medieval Norse and Germanic legend, best known for overthrowing Odoacer and founding the Kingdom of Italy.

ANSWER: Theodoric the Great [accept: Dietrich von Bern, Thjothrikr, Thjodrikr, Theodoricus, Theodric, Thithrekr, Thidrekr] {BA}

Result: 2712 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round Finals.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 28823

Question: The Purana named for this figure contains an account of a city of the dead ruled by Yama and a description of other places where the dead stay before being reborn, which according to Ernest Wood might have been influenced by contact with Christianity. That Purana is also considered the authoritative source on the Nine Pearls and other precious gemstones. This being is himself credited with creating the first emeralds from bile. The guru Drona developed a military formation named for this figure, who was born as a fire before taking his more famous shape. This father of Sapati once filled his mouth with the waters of many rivers in order to extinguish a fire, and shortly thereafter he shrank in size to pass between the spokes of a spinning wheel. On one quest, this being, whose evil stepmother was named Kadru, entered Patala in order to ransom his mother, Vinata, who had been kidnapped by the Nagas, who wanted this being to bring them amitra, the nectar of the gods. As part of a deal with Indra, this being gets to eat any snake he sees. For ten points, name this bird-man from Hindu myth, a servant and mount of Vishnu.

ANSWER: Garuda {BA}

Result: 2713 | RMP Fest | 2008 | Round: Round Finals.doc | Question: 21 | Mythology | ID: 28826

Question: Some legends state that this was the actual name of Anaxo, the wife of Electryon and mother of Alcmene. Others say that it was the actual name of Anaxibia, the wife of Nestor and mother of Antilochus, and other mythological figures said to have been called by this name include Creusa, the wife of Aeneas. In other legends a daughter of Pelops and Hippodamia with this name and not Arganippe was the mother of Danae by Acrisius, while a daughter of Adrastus with this name bore Laomedon to Ilus, and even the most famous figure with this name was also called Agriope, a Dryad who met her end from a snakebite she incurred while fleeing an attempted rape by Aristaeus. For ten points give this common name most often attached to a resident of Tartarus who was loved by a musician who could not successfully bring her back, the wife of Orpheus.

ANSWER: Eurydice {SK}

Result: 2714 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Berkeley A.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 28833

Question: In one tale, he obtains fire by challenging its guardian, his grandfather, to a tossing game; when his opponent is in the air, he causes him to fall on his head, thus defeating him. In another story he immures all of the winds save the west wind. After his mother Hina complains that her bark cloth is unable to dry in the short days, he lassoes the sun and wins from it an agremeent to make the summer days longer. Credited with inventing barbed fish-hooks and with using an ancestor's jawbone to pull up the Hawaiian Islands, FTP, who is this Polynesian trickster god?

ANSWER: Maui Potiki or Tikitiki

Result: 2715 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Brown A.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 28864

Question: He created a new star while carrying Aurvandil the Brave on his back when he broke off Aurvandil's frozen toe and threw it into the heavens, and he created two more stars from the eyes of Alvaldi's son. He suffers whenever a hone is thrown across the floor, as he still has a hone stuck in his forehead from his duel against Mist Calf and Hrungnir. He killed Geirrod with the help of Grid, who loaned him a staff, iron gloves and a belt of strength. Residing in the hall Bilskirnir with his wife Sif, FTP name this Norse god who wields the short-handled hammer Mjollnir.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 2716 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Carleton A.doc | Question: 3 | Mythology | ID: 28873

Question: She lived for a time in Alba with her companions, whose chanting caused every beast and cow within earshot to give two-thirds more milk. A man sent to protect her and her three companions was forced by an oath to attend several ale feasts, and a man sent to spy on her lost an eye to a thrown fidchell piece. The sight of a raven sipping blood in the snow prefigured her affair with a son of Usnach [OOS-nach]. Fergus took up service with Ailill [AL-il] and Medb [MAYV] after Eogan treacherously killed her lover Noisiu [NOY-shu]. FTP, name this character in the Ulster cycle whose incredible beauty brought many sorrows.

ANSWER: Deirdre or Derdriu of the Sorrows

Result: 2717 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Chicago A.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 28900

Question: He was identified with the crocodile god Khenty-Khety, fought the crocodile Maga, and regained his severed hands after the fish-trap was invented by the crocodile god Sobek. He won a battle when his semen cried out in victory from his opponent's belly. One of his sons was androgynous and was associated with dying of a broken heart, while his son Ihy was known as the "bull of confusion." Four of his sons, known as the Amerti, protected the canopic jars. His left eye was associated with the moon, and it was injured during his battle with his father's killer, Set. FTP, name this falcon-headed Egyptian god, the son of Osiris and Isis.

ANSWER: Horus

Result: 2718 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Chicago B Harvard C.doc | Question: 6 | Mythology | ID: 28918

Question: In Japanese myth, Ninigi's wife Ko-no-Hana is their princess. In Chinese myth, Han Xian Zi once read a prophetic poem on some of these. In Aztec myth they were associated with the twin deities Xochipilli and Xochiquetzal, and in Welsh myth Gwydion and Math used some of these as the raw material for creating Blodeuedd. Ovid tells of an Oceanid named Clytie who turned into one of these so she could follow Helios each day, and in Indian myth, Kama's five arrows of desire were tipped with them. People who produced some of these upon dying include a youth beloved by Apollo and Zephyrus, and a youth beloved by Echo and himself. FTP, name this type of plant life associated with Hyacinthus and Narcissus.

ANSWER: flowers or blossoms

Result: 2719 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Dartmouth A.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 28942

Question: He sold the killer of Iphitus into slavery and tried to give Iphitus's children the money he received for his half-brother from the purchaser, Omphale. One of his sons was honored with a cenotaph in the hippodrome at Olympia built by Pelops. After Hyrieus housed this character and his father, he helped Hyrieus create Orion. His sons include Myrtilus, Eos's beloved Cephalus, and Anticlea's father Autolychus. This psychopomp invented gymnastics, boxing, astronomy, and weights and measures. FTP, name this son of Maia and Zeus who was given the caduceus in recognition of his role as the messenger of the gods.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 2720 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Harvard A Brown B.doc | Question: 20 | Mythology | ID: 28975

Question: At the end of her life, this daughter of Telephassa was worshipped under the name of Hellotis in the kingdom of her husband Asterius. Her father was the twin brother of Belus, and one of her brothers was Phineus, who as an old man was tormented by the Harpies. She received a javelin and a hound that never missed their targets, and the bronze man Talos, who later guarded the kingdom of one of her sons. This daughter of Agenor was the object of her brother Cadmus's search, but he never found, FTP, this mother of Rhadamanthys and Minos who was abducted by Zeus in the form of a bull.

ANSWER: Europa or Europe

Result: 2721 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Harvard B.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 28993

Question: The god Atar was created to defeat one of these. Another one residing under Wawel Hill in Krakow was tricked with a fake lamb stuffed with sulfur, and died after drinking half the Vistula River. In Norway and Sweden they were referred to as orm or ormr. An ever-watchful one guarded a special tree tended by some daughters of Atlas, and one of these creatures almost killed Wiglaf, who refused to abandon Beowulf. In addition to Azhi Dahaka and Ladon, another of these creatures was named Fafnir. FTP, name this type of creature whose name forms part of the title of Uther.

ANSWER: dragons

Result: 2722 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Michigan A Dartmouth B.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 29015

Question: Some accounts state that he was the son of Phoenix, but most accounts agree that his father was a son of Paphus who sent one real ship and 49 small earthenware ships crewed by dolls to the Greeks during the Trojan War. One of his lovers tried to make him jealous by sleeping for a time with Butes, and the other got him gored to death on Mount Lebanon. He was born when a sword split a myrrh tree in half, and spent his formative years in a chest, then in Hades. FTP name this son of Cinyras and Smyrna who was ordered by Calliope to spend equal amounts of time making sweet love with Persephone and Aphrodite.

ANSWER: Adonis

Result: 2723 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - MIT B.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 29034

Question: This character's dreams include one of a mountain falling on him and one of a man bringing him water after a bull throws him down. In another dream he feels a sexual attraction to a meteorite that he cannot lift. This dream leads his mother, the Wild Cow, to prophesy the arrival of a man as powerful as Ninurta created by Aruru to be his companion. With that companion he kills the Bull of Heaven and the guardian of the Cedar Forest, a demon known as Humbaba. FTP name this mythical king of Uruk who teams up with Enkidu in a Mesopotamian epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 2724 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Princeton A UIUC B Midwest.doc | Question: 11 | Mythology | ID: 29071

Question: He cleansed Pelops of blood-guilt in the western stream of Oceanus, and a practical joke by his uncle resulted in him ejaculating on his half-sister's thigh, making him the father of Erichthonius. He drove off the River-god Scamander to help Achilles, and the blinded Orion took his apprentice Cedalion as a guide after finding his workshop. During the revolt of the giants, he scalded Mimas with a ladle full of red-hot metal. Pandareus and Tantalus conspired to steal a golden mastiff created by this god, and his other creations include a net that caught Ares in bed with his wife. FTP name this husband of Aphrodite, the lame smith-god of the Greeks.

ANSWER: Hephaestus

Result: 2725 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Rutgers A.doc | Question: 12 | Mythology | ID: 29093

Question: The father of Echepolus shared his name with this son of Capys and Themiste or Hieromneme. His first daughter-in-law shared her name with a daughter of Erechtheus who was the mother of Ion, Achaeus and Dorus. He traveled with Antenor to demand the return of his cousin Hesione, and secretly bred his mares with the immortal horses of his uncle Laomedon. His son was the result of a dalliance with a goddess disguised as a Phrygian princess, who later saved him by using her girdle to divert a thunderbolt thrown at him after he boasted about the affair. This made him lame, so he had to be carried away from Troy on his son's shoulders. FTP, name this mortal lover of Aphrodite, the father of Aeneas.

ANSWER: Anchises

Result: 2726 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - Vanderbilt A.doc | Question: 18 | Mythology | ID: 29141

Question: In the tale of Hedinn and Hogni, this deity convinced Hedinn to crush Hogni's wife and kidnap his daughter, in order to fulfill another god's wish for an everlasting battle. In the Hyndluljoth the giantess Hyndla recognizes the boar Hildesvini as this goddess's human lover Ottar in disguise. According to the Prose Edda, her palace Folkvangr is the destination of half of the slain warriors, and she would have had to marry the giant Blast if he had completed the walls of Asgard in time. She had sex with four dwarves to obtain the necklace Brisingamen, and usually traveled in a chariot drawn by two cats. FTP name this daughter of Njord, a Vanir goddess of love and fertility.

ANSWER: Freya [or Freyja; or Friia]

Result: 2727 | ACF Regionals | 2007 | Round: 2007 ACF Regionals - VCU A.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 29158

Question: While taking them through Hylaea, their captor impregnated a half-woman, half-snake with Scythes, the ancestor of the Scythians. Some of them were dragged backwards into a cave by Cacus, an uncle of their original owner. Menoetes first reported their theft to their owner, a son of Callirhoe and Chrysaor. Their theft from Erytheia followed the deaths of the herdsman Eurytion and the two-headed dog Orthrus, and they were eventually sacrificed to Hera by Eurystheus. Acquired between the quests for Hippolyte's girdle and the apples of the Hesperides, FTP name these bovines belonging to a three-bodied giant.

ANSWER: the cattle of Geryon or obvious equivalents

Result: 2728 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 1 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 58888

Question: Some obscure gods who fill this role include the African deity Funzi, the Etruscan god Sethlans, and the Slavic deity Svarog. One of these in Germanic legend marries the swan maiden Hervor before being captured by king Nidhad, but he kills Nidhad's sons and seduces his daughter Bodvild. These types of deities are represented in Celtic myth by Creidhne, Luchta, and Goibnu, and the above Germanic figure is Volund or Wayland. FTP, these are what type of gods, also represented ►by Ilmarinen in the Kalevala, and most famously by Vulcan and Hephaestus, a deity who typically excels at building stuff.

ANSWER: smith gods (accept equivalents: blacksmiths, divine smiths, craft-gods, artificers, "gods who build stuff" before it's mentioned, etc.)

Result: 2729 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 10 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 60037

Question: This god was known in the Teotihuacan culture as the "God with a mask," and is also known as Yohuallahuantzin or "inebriated in the night." His disguise is the "spoon bird" or Tlauhquechol and he is said to preside over the house of the East. He's also the patron god of goldsmiths, which makes sense since he appears as a shining golden god after he makes food available to humanity in a rather unusual way. FTP, name this Aztec deity also called the "red Tezcatlipoca" who is known ►for flaying himself and wearing the skin of flayed humans, and whose name literally means "flayed lord."

ANSWER: Xipe Totec

Result: 2730 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 2 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 58923

Question: This god had a vizier named Mukisanu and a messenger Imbaluri, who sent a message to the Sea that this deity was king of all gods and the Sea held a feast in his honor. His wife Sertapsuruhi gave birth to the dragon Hedammu, but this god himself birthed Aranzahu and Tasmisu as well as the weather god Teshub. Teshub then overthrew him and he copulated with a rock cliff to birth Ullikummi, the great stone giant. This god had earlier bitten off the genitals of ►Anu to succeed him as king of gods. FTP, name this great Hurrian deity.

ANSWER: Kummarbi (you can prompt Enlil, I suppose, since he's sort of cognate)

Result: 2731 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 3 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 58956

Question: The messengers of this deity were set free when a bow was stuck into the trunk of a tree, dislodging the two immortal doves that accompany this god, also known as the "god of eight bandaroles." He is analogous to the Buddhist deity Bishamonten and is usually worshipped together with his mother, Jingu the Empress. Often considered the deified form of Ojin Tenno, the 15th emperor, he is worshipped at the Tsurugaoka shrine in Kamakura, as he was the patron deity of the Minamoto clan. FTP, name this Shinto god ►of war.

ANSWER: Hachiman-shin (or Yawata-no-kami)

Result: 2732 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 3 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 58978

Question: The messengers of this deity were set free when a bow was stuck into the trunk of a tree, dislodging the two immortal doves that accompany this god, also known as the "god of eight bandaroles." He is analogous to the Buddhist deity Bishamonten and is usually worshipped together with his mother, Jingu the Empress. Often considered the deified form of Ojin Tenno, the 15th emperor, he is worshipped at the Tsurugaoka shrine in Kamakura, as he was the patron deity of the Minamoto clan. FTP, name this Shinto god ►of war.

ANSWER: Hachiman-shin (or Yawata-no-kami)

Result: 2733 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 4 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 58994

Question: At the beginning of this work, the title figure declares "I born of giants remember from times long ago, those which first gave me life in Etin-home" and claims to remember nine worlds and nine giant women. Six of its stanzas are simply a catalogue of dwarves, of whom the mightiest is Motsognir, and it later notes repeatedly that "Garm bays without end in front of Gnipa" while describing the events of ►Ragnarok. FTP, name this first part of the Poetic Edda, also known as the Prophecy of the Seeress.

ANSWER: Voluspa (or Prophecy of the Seeress/Seeress's Prophecy before it's said; prompt Poetic Edda)

Result: 2734 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 4 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 59013

Question: During the first season of Charmed, Piper is attacked by one of these which disguises itself as a female FBI agent during the day, and she has to freeze a bullet in mid-air to save herself. One of them was killed by the giant Missahba after a two-week long contest of strength which involved hurling pieces of a mountain. According to other stories, the surest way to become one is to feast on corpses in the midst of famine. Often described as possessing a heart of ice, one of them was killed by a warrior who became ►the Great Dog. FTP, name these cannibals of the forest, which are feared spirits in Algonquin mythology.

ANSWER: wendigo (or windigo)

Result: 2735 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 5 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 59808

Question: In one of his angrier moments, this god changed the huntress Arge into a stag for boasting. As a punishment, Aphrodite caused him to fall in love with Leucothoe, who was tragically buried alive by her father Orchamus. This god's daughter Lampetia watched over his prized possessions on the island of Thrinacia. Three of his other daughters  Aegiale, Aegle, and Aetheria  were said to be turned into poplar trees and their tears became amber after the death of their brother, who was this god's son by ►Clymene. That son caused the Ethiopians to be forever black when he recklessly drove this god's chariot. FTP, name this Greek god of the sun.

ANSWER: Helios

Result: 2736 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 6 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 59835

Question: This mythological figure had a daughter named Maga, who was the wife of Ross the Red and later Cathbad. He once loved Derbrenn, a woman with six foster children turned into swine, and his foster father was Midhir. One famous story tells how he tricked Elcmar using a ruse based on the double-meaning of the phrase "night and day," which allowed him to permanently live in the Bruig na Boinne. His main consort was Caer Ibormeith, who blissfully flew away with him after he identified her amongst 150 swan maidens. His father, ►the Dagda, made the sun stand still so that this figure was conceived in one day. FTP, name this Celtic god of love and youth.

ANSWER: Angus Mac Og (or Aengus, Oengus, etc.  you know how this Celtic shit is)

Result: 2737 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 6 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 59856

Question: This mythological figure had a daughter named Maga, who was the wife of Ross the Red and later Cathbad. He once loved Derbrenn, a woman with six foster children turned into swine, and his foster father was Midhir. One famous story tells how he tricked Elcmar using a ruse based on the double-meaning of the phrase "night and day," which allowed him to permanently live in the Bruig na Boinne. His main consort was Caer Ibormeith, who blissfully flew away with him after he identified her amongst 150 swan maidens. His father, ►the Dagda, made the sun stand still so that this figure was conceived in one day. FTP, name this Celtic god of love and youth.

ANSWER: Angus Mac Og (or Aengus, Oengus, etc.  you know how this Celtic shit is)

Result: 2738 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 7 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 59973

Question: In one tradition, this god is the son of Anasuya and the sage Atri; in another story he is a king captured by the Gandharvas until the goddess Vach is sent in the form of a woman. He married twenty seven daughters of Prasuti and Daksha, but trouble arose when he came to favor just one of those daughters Rohini, and was condemned to wither and die by Daksha. He once carried off the wife of Vrihaspati leading to a great war; that wife Tara was later recovered and finally admitted that this god was the real father of her son, the radiant Budha. FTP, name this god ►of the moon who is better known in his form as a plant and as an intoxicating drink coveted by the gods, and also known as a drug in Brave New World.

ANSWER: Soma (also accept Chandra who is a moon god closely connected to Soma)

Result: 2739 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 8 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 60000

Question: There is evidence that the story of this woman's childhood was based on the Thracian tale of Harpalyce. She meets her death when she is enchanted by the gold worn by Chloreus, a Phrygian eunuch priest, but that death is ordered to be avenged by Opis. She was bound to a spear and thrown to the opposite bank of the river Amasenus by her father Metabus, who was fleeing his attackers. Said to be so swift that she could traverse a field of corn without bending a blade or a sea without wetting her feet, she was killed by Arruns while ►fighting in battle as the queen of the Volscians. FTP, name this virgin beloved by Diana who fights with Turnus against Aeneas.

ANSWER: Camilla

Result: 2740 | The Experiment | 2007 | Round: 9 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 60021

Question: This god could appear in a four-headed form known as Sheft-hat and was dubbed the "Father of Fathers and Mother of Mothers." Sometimes he has two consorts, Nebetu and Menhit; in another triad he is the father of Heka, the personifaction of magic. More commonly, his daughter is "the embracer" Anuket and his wife is Satet, but he was considered to be the husband of the frog goddess Heqet at Antinoe. Originally a guardian of the source of the Nile, he became an assistant to Hapi and was linked only to the silt deposits along the river, which makes sense given that he was worshipped at Elephantine as part of a ►certain creation myth in which silt plays a role. FTP, name this Egyptian god who created the world and all those living in it on his potter's wheel.

ANSWER: Khnum (or Khenem/Khenemu  you know, anything in that neighborhood)

Result: 2741 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: ACF Editors 1.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 29162

Question: During this man's reign, he quarreled with Rezon of Aram and was allied with the pharaoh, who burned down the Canaanite city of Gezer and offered it to him as a gift. His deeds included conquest on the sea with Hiram of Tyre and the founding of the city of Megiddo. The prophet Ahijah of Shiloh predicted that the son of Nebat would succeed him instead of one of his own sons, and this came true when Jeroboam succeeded him, but he may never have become king if not for defeating the conspiracy of Adonijah with the help of the prophet Nathan and of his mother, Bathsheba. FTP, name this man who recommended cutting a baby in half; the son of King David and the purported author of Ecclesiastes, Proverbs, and the Song of Songs.

ANSWER: King Solomon

Result: 2742 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: ACF Editors 1.doc | Question: 16 | Mythology | ID: 29171

Question: This figure appears with the Cynic philosopher Menippus in the twenty-second dialogue of Lucian. Depictions of him in Greek art include a painting by Polygnotus at Delphi and he often appears on lekythoi dressed as a laborer. In Etruscan myth, he is represented as a large-winged demon with a hammer, and it is said that he can be bribed by giving him a golden bough from a Sibyl. The son of Erebus and Nyx, he is sometimes said to be located at Cocytus or Acheron, but is usually associated with another river. FTP, name this man who receives the obolus from the souls of dead man and ferries them across the river Styx in Greek mythology.

ANSWER: Charon

Result: 2743 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: ACF Editors 2.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 29186

Question: The creator of inada, the sight of this creature at birth was unbearable, which lead to banishment via the Celestial Ladder. This deity's main holy place, which contains a mirror in its inner sanctum and is pulled-down and rebuilt every two decades, is at Ise-Jingue. Enraged by the noise of her brother, she had to be lured from hiding by the antics of Uzume. As Tamayori is the son of Owatatsumi, her brother, Jimmu is a lineal, not direct descendant of this goddess. With a name meaning "shining heaven," this eldest daughter of Izanagi and Izanami is antagonistic to Susanowa. FTP, name this Shinto goddess of the sky and sun.

ANSWER: Amaterasu

Result: 2744 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: Boston University - Carnegie Mellon.doc | Question: 5 | Mythology | ID: 29227

Question: In one story, this being ends a drought and heals the goddess of beauty after she tries to fly to his kingdom, burning herself ugly. He commanded his son to fashion a golden chain and dangle an egg from it, from which was born the bird Sankofa. He sent his maid Arugba out with a divine bag, which began life on Earth. In the Ketu cult of Bahia, he is worshiped as Yansan, while in other traditions he is called Ogus. Never worshipped directly, he owns everything that is white on Earth, so he is the god of purity and ruler of the sky. FTP, what is this father of Obatala and Odudua; the Yoruba creator god?

ANSWER: Olurun (or Oludumare; accept Yansan or Ogus before they're mentioned)

Result: 2745 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: Boston University - Carnegie Mellon.doc | Question: 15 | Mythology | ID: 29237

Question: This figure caused a group of men led by Heinin Vardd to be struck dumb; when questioned about his actions, he says that he had "borne a banner before Alexander," was in Canaan when Absalom was killed, and that Heinin and Idno call him Merddin. He protected a woman's honor by tricking Rhun into cutting off another woman's finger. By using a twig of holly, he is able to win a race on Dobbin to settle a feud with Maelgwyn. He was found by Elphin, who saved him from Ceridwen. FTP, identify this Welsh mythological figure, Gwion reborn, who lent his name to Frank Lloyd Wright's house.

ANSWER: Taliesin (accept Merddin or Gwion before they're mentioned)

Result: 2746 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: Brown.doc | Question: 7 | Mythology | ID: 29250

Question: In the Merseburg Incantations, this character is also referred to as Phol and is aided by his family when his mount sprains its foot. The Gylfaginning claims that "none may gainsay his judgments" while Saxo Grammaticus held him to be a historical rival of Hotherus in the Gesta Danorum. Due to the treachery of Thokk, and despite the use of Hringhorni, the largest ship in the world, Hermod failed in his mission to retrieve this god. However, the Voluspa foretells his resurrection following Ragnarok. FTP, identify this son of Frigg mistakenly killed by his brother Hoder's mistletoe arrow; the Norse god of beauty.

ANSWER: Balder or Baldur (accept Phol before it's mentioned)

Result: 2747 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: Florida State - Harvard A - Yale.doc | Question: 10 | Mythology | ID: 29297

Question: He appears second in the chronology carved by Khnum-ib-re, immediately following his father, Kanofer. His name also appeared in the "Song of the Harper" next to that of Hardedef and he was said to have abated the Seven Years Famine. He or one of his followers may be the author of the Edwin Smith papyrus and those devoted to him spent the night in his temples in Memphis hoping that he would reveal miracles in their dreams. The temple of Edfu was thought to have been his work, but he is better known for his work with the pharaoh Djoser. FTP, identify this man identified with the Greek Asclepius and sometimes even with Jesus; a twenty-seventh-century BCE Egyptian sage, doctor, and architect who designed the first pyramid, the step pyramid of Saqqara.

ANSWER: Imhotep

Result: 2748 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: Florida State - Harvard A - Yale.doc | Question: 17 | Mythology | ID: 29304

Question: Some stories have it that this character was conceived by Math's rod in a test of his mother's virginity and, due to her meddling, his wife had to be created from flowers. His namesake -nasad was a widely held August first festival. Though he survived birth unlike his two brothers, his mother Aranhrod often sought to murder him and he was saved only through the intercession of Gwydion. Having epithets Llaw Gyffes, or dexterous, and Lamfota, or long-armed, Caesar identified him with Mercury. FTP, name this member of the Tuatha De Danann; the patron of every skill and Celtic god of light.

ANSWER: Lugus (or Lugh or Samildanach)

Result: 2749 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: George Washington.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 29318

Question: His adventures are compared to those of Boreas in the first section of the Phaedrus. Often shown holding a chicken, he grew up in Phrygia and was indirectly responsible for his brother's immortality, an attribute bargained for by Eos, who originally fetched him. Grief over his departure was assuaged somewhat by the two swift horses that Hermes brought his father and his story was used by Appolodorus and Plato to argue for the superiority of male love. This brother of Tithonus and son of Laomedon eventually succeeded Hebe in her primary position on Mt. Olympus. FTP, identify this Trojan prince who was loved by Zeus and became the cupbearer of the gods.

ANSWER: Ganymede

Result: 2750 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: Illinois - Rutgers-Newark.doc | Question: 4 | Mythology | ID: 29335

Question: Described as the "offspring of silence, sky-bolt of Ninurta," this person dumbfounds a hunter who encounters him at the watering place. This character dreams of the council at which he is sentenced to death and of the "house of dust" that awaits him; his predictions prove accurate, as he is struck-down by illness for slaying the Bull of Heaven. Civilized by the attentions of Shamhat, in tablets III-V he prepares to fight Humbaba with his friend, who mourns for this clay-born bull-man in tablet VIII's lament, then goes off to seek Utnapishtam. FTP, name this character who was designed to "to match the ardor of the energies" of the King of Uruk, Gilgamesh.

ANSWER: Enkidu

Result: 2751 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: Kentucky - UCLA.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 29367

Question: One woman by this name gave birth on Mount Cithairon after being dragged back from Sicyon by her uncle Lycus. Tormented by Dirce, she was the mother-in-law of Niobe and her sons by Zeus, Amphion and Zethus, built the walls of Thebes. The second woman by this name is sometimes called by the feminized version of her son's name or sometimes said to be the sister of a woman with that name. She was abducted while bringing presents on board a stranger's ship, prompting her followers to wage war with Athens. FTP, give the shared name of these mythological women, the second of whom, possibly identical with Hippolyta, was an Amazon queen and wife of Theseus.

ANSWER: Antiope

Result: 2752 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: Princeton A - Texas A&M.doc | Question: 8 | Mythology | ID: 29426

Question: Aphrodite saved Butes from this group, the offspring of either Achelous or Phorcys. Ovid explains that they were playmates of Persephone punished for failing to protect her. There are but two of them mentioned in their most famous appearance, one of whom is named Himeropa; later instances list up to five and say that their feathers were plucked to form crowns after they lost a singing contest with the Muses. Some accounts claim they killed themselves after being outdone by Orpheus on behalf of Jason or after their cloying was defeated using beeswax by Odysseus' men. FTP, identify this group of mythological creatures who drew sailors to their death with beautiful singing.

ANSWER: sirens

Result: 2753 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: Texas.doc | Question: 9 | Mythology | ID: 29448

Question: This person was identified with Hittite Aqhat, who refused to yield his bow to Anatha. Conceived when the bee-keeper Hyreius made water on the hide of a bull and buried it in his wife's grave, he was compelled to carry Cedalion to the edge of the Earth in penance for raping Oenopion's daughter Merope, for only then would Helios restore his sight. Some myths claim that Aesclepius was struck dead while trying to revive this man. Apollo fooled Artemis into believing this man had seduced Opos as Candaon, so she had his struck down while he was swimming near Ortygia; later ruing this decision, she flung her assassin into the sky along with this man and his dog. FTP, name this hunter who is constantly being pursued by a scorpion and who had a dog named Sirius.

ANSWER: Orion

Result: 2754 | ACF Regionals | 2006 | Round: Texas.doc | Question: 14 | Mythology | ID: 29453

Question: One of this location's features, Gipul Catena, is an almost six hundred twenty-kilometer-long straight line of craters, and its magnetic field is generated by rapid circulation of a large electrolyte flow beneath its surface, making it strong enough to be detectable even in the larger fields of nearby bodies. As it has almost no geological activity, it has the oldest and most cratered surface in the solar system. Many of its features are named after Norse mythology, as exemplified by the impact craters Valhalla and Asgard. It is the third-largest moon in the solar system and is farther away from Jupiter than the other Galilean moons. FTP, name this moon named after a nymph Zeus loved who was transformed into a bear.

ANSWER: Callisto

Result: 2755 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 56792

Question: The name of this character's daughter, or one of the names Cercysera or Aissa, was used by Achilles while he was disguised as a woman in the court of Lycomedes. His daughter married his nephew, and the couple survived the consequences the impious behavior of the sons of Lycaon; afterwards, his daughter and nephew were advised to throw the bones of their mother over their shoulders. His wife had life breathed into her by the four winds after being fashioned from clay. FTP, name this father of Pyrrha and uncle of Deucalion, a not-so-bright Titan who married Pandora.

ANSWER: Epimetheus

Result: 2756 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 56793

Question: This god was credited with saving Pelusium and forcing Sennacherib's Assyrians to retreat in the face of an army of rats. The Shabaka Stone claims that this god, often identified with Tenen and Seker, is the Heart and the Tongue of the Ennead of Heliopolis. He was said to have invented the "Opening of the Mouth" ritual used to reanimate mummies, and he was typically represented as a mummified figure. This father of the god of the primeval lotus, Nefertem, was identified by the Greeks with Hephaestos. FTP name this "Divine Artificer," the supreme god of Memphis.

ANSWER: Ptah

Result: 2757 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 56794

Question: He killed his sister Cilla and her infant son Munippus following a prophecy by Aesacus, his son by his first wife Arisbe. This man's father and all of his brothers were slain by Heracles after his father refused to give Heracles the two immortal horses given in recompense for the abduction of this man's great-uncle Ganymede. This father of Polyxena and Deiphobus was led under cover of night through an enemy camp by Hermes so that he could ransom his son's body from Achilles. FTP name this father of Cassandra and king of Troy during the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Priam

Result: 2758 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 56795

Question: He once cursed his wife in her incarnation as a daughter of Mena to become a fisherwoman, then sent a servant in the form of a shark to persecute the town she was in. In his role as Natesa, he is often depicted using one foot to crush Apasmara, the dwarf of ignorance. His mount, sometimes considered the leader of the Ganas, provides the music for the Tandava, the dance he performs as Nataraja. That mount, known as the guardian of all quadrupeds, is the bull Nandi. His wife's incarnations include Daksha's daughter Sati, the golden goddess Uma, and Himavan's daughter Parvati. FTP, name this three-eyed god, sometimes called the destroyer.

ANSWER: Shiva

Result: 2759 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 56796

Question: This Roman deity was sometimes identified with Tanit and Uni, and gave her name to the guardian spirit of women, the feminine equivalent of the genius. She was given the title "Moneta" in recognition of her role in guarding the finances of Rome. In the Aeneid, she plots the marriage of Dido and Aeneas, and opens the Gate of War when Latinus refuses to do so. Her role in childbirth was recognized in the festival of the Matronalia, and her own children included the goddess Juventas, who was the Roman equivalent of Hebe, and the god Vulcan. FTP, name the Roman equivalent of Hera.

ANSWER: Juno

Result: 2760 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56797

Question: This was the form taken by two of Finn's cousins or nephews, named Sceolan and Bran. In the tale of Culhwch and Olwen, Chief Boar Ysgithyrwyn is killed by one of these creatures named Cavall. Pwyll saw a group of these creatures with white bodies and red ears just before meeting Arawn. Tristan trained one of these creatures, named Hodain or Husdant, to run and hunt silently. A supernatural horde of these creatures was said to follow Gwyn ap Nudd, or Herne, in the Wild Hunt. FTP, name these creatures, one of which guarded Culainn until it was killed and replaced by Cuchulainn.

ANSWER: dogs or hounds (accept equivalents)

Result: 2761 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 56798

Question: He first meets his love, who is so beautiful her arms light up the sea and sky, in the forest of Barri, nine days after she agrees to marry him. This progenitor of the Ynglings is fated to kill Beli either with his bare fists or with an antler as a result of the nuptial agreements. He was given, as a tooth-gift, the world of Alfheim, where he resides with his wife, the daughter of Aurboda and Gymir, whom he first spotted while sitting on Hlidskialf. The giantess Gerd was wooed by Skirnir on behalf of, FTP, what Vanir god of fertility, the son of Njord?

ANSWER: Frey or Freyr (accept Yng or Yngvi before "Ynglings")

Result: 2762 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 56799

Question: In Korean mythology, one hundred days in a cave, eating only mugwort and garlic, were sufficient to turn one of these creatures into a beautiful woman, who married Hwanung. The nerves of these creatures were used as one of the ingredients in fashioning the chain Gleipnir. In the Ramayana, Jambuvan led an army of these creatures into battle alongside the monkeys. The name of a group of battle-frenzied warriors in Norse sagas came from their habit of wearing the skins of these creatures. In Greek myth, Arcas and Callisto were transformed into, FTP, what type of animal which also suckled the infant Atalanta?

ANSWER: bears

Result: 2763 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 56800

Question: The source for the central event of this tale is probably the tale of "Bricriu's Feast," in which Cuchulainn successfully answers the challenges of Úath, son of Imoman, and the disguised Cu Roi. The title characters make a pact to exchange whatever they win for three days, but the protagonist neglects to hand over a girdle given to him by the lady of Hautdesert which he hopes will save him, earning him a cut on the neck. FTP, name this tale in which a nephew of King Arthur and the colorfully-dressed Sir Bertilak play the beheading game.

ANSWER: Sir Gawain and the Green Knight or Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight

Result: 2764 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 56801

Question: Pelops supposedly built the Peloponnese's first temple to this god to atone for the murder of this god's son Myrtilus. This god appeared on the isle of Aeaea to give the herb moly to a certain hero, and later appeared on the isle of Ogygia to secure the release of that same hero. He was the father of Eos's lover Cephalus, and of Odysseus's grandfather Autolycus. He was born on Mount Cyllene, where he used a tortoise shell and some cow-gut to invent the lyre, with which he lulled his mother Maia to sleep. FTP, name this Greek messenger god who carried the caduceus.

ANSWER: Hermes

Result: 2765 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 56802

Question: Her daughter was turned into a wryneck for casting a spell on Zeus that caused him to fall in love with Io. That daughter, Iynx, was born after this character was seduced by Pan. She helped in the escape of a group of mountain nymphs who were dallying with Zeus by keeping Hera busy with idle chatter, and Hera gave her an appropriate punishment. She fell in love with a youth whom she followed while he went hunting, longing to address him but unable to speak first. After he rejected her, she pined away until only her voice was left. FTP, name this nymph who fell in love with Narcissus, who could only repeat what others said.

ANSWER: Echo

Result: 2766 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 56803

Question: He was born holding a torch and a knife, and was sometimes described as having 1,000 ears and 10,000 eyes. He was one of two deities who assisted another god in weighing souls on a golden scale on the Chinvat Bridge. He appears in Hindu mythology as an Aditya in the Vedas, often paired with Varuna, and appears as a prominent Yazad in the Avestas. He was worshipped in artificial caves with representations of the tauroctony. He was born from a cave or a rock, and created or fertilized the world by killing the cosmic bull. FTP name this Iranian god of light worshipped as Sol Invictus, whose cult became popular in Rome.

ANSWER: Mithra or Mithras or Mitra

Result: 2767 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 56804

Question: In a story narrated by Serqet, this god is said to have concealed his true name in his stomach, but a goddess takes advantage of his advancing senility to force him to reveal it. He was sometimes associated with the bull Merwer and the Bennu bird. In one variant of the Hermopolitan cosmogony, he appears out of the Sea of the Two Knives seated on a lotus flower. In the myth of the Distant Goddess, a fierce goddess known as his Eye abandons him. His cult originated in the Egyptian town of Iunu, known to the Greeks as Heliopolis. FTP, name this sun-god sometimes combined with Atum and Amun, considered the father of Tefnut.

ANSWER: Ra or Re

Result: 2768 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 56805

Question: It was assembled by a Thespian in Pagasae. At one point, a fluttering halcyon announced that it would remain immobile until Rhea had been placated, and when it was completed, it took Orpheus's help to get it started. Constructed of materials taken from Mount Pelion, and an oracular piece from the Dodonian oak of Zeus, it lost an ornament to the Cyaneae, or Planctae, or Sympleglades, at the entrance to the Bosporus, but it would have suffered more damage if it hadn't been for the advice of Phineus. It was dedicated to Poseidon at the Isthmus of Corinth, where it was beached after returning from Colchis. FTP, name this ship used on the quest for the golden fleece, captained by Jason.

ANSWER: the Argo

Result: 2769 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 56806

Question: In one story, he leads the hosts of 154 districts to avenge one of the three unfortunate slaps; later, he provides the material for one of the three fortunate interments. That story features a magic cauldron previously given by this character to his opponent, Matholwch. This character provides the means to cross the river Shannon by laying his own body across the river. He prophecies seven years of feasting in Harlech with the birds of Rhiannon singing to his companions after being struck in the heel by a poison spear. FTP, name this gigantic man whose talking head kept Wales safe from oppression.

ANSWER: Bran

Result: 2770 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 56807

Question: He supposedly inhabited a cave on Mount Haemus which had seven recesses used by Ares as stables. Cleopatra and Chione, who secretly gave birth to Poseidon's son Eumolpus, were his two daughters by Oreithyia. Oreithyia also bore him twins who, while serving as Argonauts, drove away Aellopus and Ocypete, two monsters who tormented a king by befouling his victuals. FTP, name this brother of Notus and father of Calais and Zetes, the personified North Wind.

ANSWER: Boreas (accept North Wind until the end)

Result: 2771 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 56808

Question: These people believed in an underworld named Adlivun. In one of their stories, a god throws his daughter overboard, and when she tries to climb back in, he chops off her fingers, some of which become whales. That god, Anguta, later has his hands and feet bitten off by the dogs of his daughter. In another of their stories, a spirit known as Fart Man proves himself the mightiest of spirits by laying the curse of constipation on Caribou Master. FTP, name these people who worshipped the goddess Sedna as well as Nanook, the god of polar bears.

ANSWER: Inuit or Eskimos

Result: 2772 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 56809

Question: This woman was the maternal grandmother of Ivar the Boneless, as her daughter married Ragnar Lodbrok. This woman's husband died while playing a harp with his toes, after being bound in a pit full of snakes at the command of Atli. This daughter of King Budli was stabbed by a sleeping thorn after giving Agnar or Audabrodir victory over Hjalmgunnar, who had been promised victory by Odin. Her true love married Gudrun and then won her hand on behalf of Gudrun's brother Gunnar. FTP, name this shieldmaiden of who vowed to marry the man who rode through a ring of fire to claim her.

ANSWER: Brynhild or Brunhilde

Result: 2773 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 56810

Question: According to some sources, this man instructed Heracles in fencing, infantry and cavalry tactics. In a Roman story, Mercury gave this hero Celeris, the brother of Pegasus. He and his brother carried off Hilaeira and Phoebe, who were betrothed to Idas and Lynceus, this man's eventual killers. Before his death, he was betrothed to his cousin Electra. He could be distinguished from his brother by the absence of boxing scars on his face, and won fame as a horse-tamer. When he died, he was allowed to share his twin brother's immortality. FTP, name this son of Leda and brother of Polydeuces or Pollux.

ANSWER: Castor

Result: 2774 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 1 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 56811

Question: In one story, this character uses his mighty battleaxe to kill a snake "who knows no charm" and frightens the Anzu-bird and the "maid of desolation," Lilit, out of a huluppu-tree. He has a dream in which he feels a strong sexual attraction to an immovable rock that falls from the heavens, symbolizing the coming of his companion, who helps him defeat the guardian of the Cedar Forest. Later, this son of Ninsun encounters the ale-wife Siduri and the boatman Urshanabi during his quest for immortality. FTP, name this Sumerian king of Uruk, the hero of the earliest extant epic.

ANSWER: Gilgamesh

Result: 2775 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 57292

Question: This god presided over a world of acorn-eating giants who were ultimately eaten by ferocious jaguars. Like the Mayan Itzam Na, he was thought to have four manifestations, each associated with a color and cardinal direction; thus, Xipe Totec was sometimes considered this god's red form. In another manifestation, he tempted the Earth-Monster Cipactli or Tlaltecuhtli to the surface of the waters at the cost of his enormous foot. His missing foot was replaced by his namesake instrument of divination, which reflected the night sky. FTP, name this Aztec god known as "Smoking Mirror" whose opposite was Tezcatlanextia.

ANSWER: Tezcatlipoca

Result: 2776 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57293

Question: According to some accounts, birds dropped out of the sky during this man's funeral, stunned by the uproar. He gave Ajax the sword with which Ajax later committed suicide. His young son, sometimes known as Scamandrius, was thrown over the battlements of his home city by Odysseus or Neoptolemus. After an inconclusive duel, Ajax gave this man the baldric by which he was later dragged to death, and after his death his body was dragged thrice daily around the tomb of Patroclus. FTP, name this father of Astyanax and husband of Andromache, the eldest son of Priam.

ANSWER: Hector

Result: 2777 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57294

Question: In one myth, he is beheaded under the sacred ished tree by the Great Tom Cat. In another myth, his opponent takes the form of an ichneumon or mongoose and kills him. He was born from the saliva of the goddess Neith when she was still in the primeval waters, and grew to a length of 120 yards. He was usually said to attack in the seventh and twelfth hours of the night, and was greatly feared for his hypnotic eyes and crushing coils. FTP, name this all-devouring chaos monster, typically depicted as a crocodile or serpent, which attacked Ra every night.

ANSWER: Apep or Apophis

Result: 2778 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 57295

Question: This character's son by the daughter of Billing did not wash his hands or comb his hair for one day following birth, waiting until he had achieved his purpose by killing another of this character's sons. Another of this character's sons had runes carved on his tongue and was considered the patron of skalds. He seduced Gunnlod, and had one son apiece by Rind, Grid, and Jord. His sons by Rind and Grid were, respectively, Vali and Bragi. He also brought life to Ask and Embla, in some stories with help of his brothers Vili and Ve. FTP name this god called the "All-Father" whose son by Jord was Thor.

ANSWER: Odin

Result: 2779 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57296

Question: According to Pausanias, the treacherous Polyxo sent handmaidens disguised as these characters to hang Helen. In the Aeneid, one of them appears to Turnus in the guise of Juno's aged priestess Calybe, and inspires Queen Amata to pretend to be in the grips of a Bacchus-induced frenzy. They had a sanctuary next to the Finger Shrine, which marks the spot where some of them turned white when a hero bit off his own finger. That hero asked the Delphic Oracle for advice on ridding himself of them after killing the lover of Aegisthus. FTP, name these avengers of blood guilt, sometimes identified as Megaera, Allecto, and Tisiphone, who hounded Orestes for the murder of Clytemnestra.

ANSWER: the Furies or Erinyes (prompt on Eumenides, Kindly Ones, or Solemn Ones)

Result: 2780 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 57297

Question: His mother, determined to have a child without recourse to her husband, conceived this god by touching a magical flower from the fields of Olenus, according to the Fasti of Ovid. This god, or Jupiter, dropped a shield from the heavens as a sign of benevolence to Numa Pompilius, who had eleven copies made to prevent theft. By his consort Nerio, he was the father of Fuga and Timor. He also fathered two sons on a mortal woman sometimes called Ilia who was a Vestal Virgin and the daughter of King Numitor. FTP, name this father of Remus, the Roman god of war.

ANSWER: Mars

Result: 2781 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57298

Question: This man tries twice to support himself in England as a shoemaker, but he has too much success and is forced to quit by angry shoemakers. Later, he builds a gallows for a pregnant mouse he captures after two of his companions disappear, leaving him alone with Cigfa. This half-brother of Nisien and Efnisien appears in the second branch of the Mabinogi as one of seven Welshmen who survive an attack against Ireland to free this man's sister Branwen. FTP, name this son of Llyr who became the second husband of Rhiannon.

ANSWER: Manawydan ap Llyr

Result: 2782 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57299

Question: In one story, this character was protected from rape when a friendly goddess sent her detachable vagina across the sea. Her older brother, a shark-god, helped her navigate after she was banished for seducing her older sister's husband. That sister, a water-goddess, harrassed her by flooding her out every time she created a new home, forcing her to travel from island to island. She often shared a grotto under a burning lake with her favorite sister, Hiiaka'. Frequently appearing as a beautiful young woman or an old crone wearing black, FTP name this resident of Kilauea, the Polynesian goddess of volcanic eruptions.

ANSWER: Pele

Result: 2783 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 57300

Question: He won the title of Buphagus when he lost an ox-eating contest to Lepreus. He killed Oreus and Hylaeus after Nephele sent a downpour to help her grandchildren, who became maddened when this man insisted on opening a jar of wine left by Dionysus in the cave of his host Pholus. He wrestled successfully with a giant who regained strength every time he touched the earth, and with the River-god Achelous. He married Hebe following his ascension to heaven, which occurred after he donned a poisonous shirt given to him by his wife Deianeira. FTP, name this strong son of Alcmene who performed twelve labors.

ANSWER: Heracles

Result: 2784 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57301

Question: In one text, he has the golden box containing the uraeus of Ra opened in his presence, killing all of his companions and leaving him badly burnt, but he is healed by a lock of Ra's hair. In some tales, he appears as a vigorous bull who fertilizes the celestial cow, while in other stories he is described as a gander, the "Great Cackler," but he was typically pictured lying prone with vegetation sprouting from his back, as the earth-god. FTP, name this husband of Nut and father of Osiris.

ANSWER: Geb or Seb or Keb

Result: 2785 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 57302

Question: This goddess was sometimes said to be a daughter of Meion and Dindyme who had been exposed on her namesake mountain and nourished there by leopards and other ferocious beasts. In another story, the sky-god Papas masturbates on this goddess while she is disguised as the Agdos rock, producing the double-sexed creature Agdistis. Her followers included the satyr Marsyas and the Galli. According to some sources, one of her sanctuaries was defiled by Hippomenes and Atalanta, so she turned them into lions and yoked them to her chariot. Often identified with Rhea, FTP name this Great Mother goddess of Anatolia.

ANSWER: Cybele or Kybele or Cybebe or Mater Deum Magna Idaea

Result: 2786 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57303

Question: This character, who was born at Carmarthen, was sometimes identified as Emrys Gwledig, and he left a treasure near Dinas Emrys which was destined to be discovered by a youth with yellow hair and blue eyes. After revealing the struggles of a native red dragon with a foreign white dragon, he foretold the coming of a ruler symbolized as the Boar of Cornwall. He was credited with manufacturing an item which passed to King Leodegan, and with moving the Giants' Ring from County Kildare to Salisbury Plain. He also set up a tryst with Ygrainne by magically disguising Uther. FTP, name this wizard and advisor to Arthur.

ANSWER: Merlin

Result: 2787 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57304

Question: The island of Lanka appeared during a brief absence of this character from his defense of a mountain against the onslaught of Vayu. When he was born, he was so radiant that he was mistaken for Agni and worshipped. His mother lost a wager a wager regarding the color of the horse Uchchaisravas and was imprisoned. He fended off the attacks of Indra while securing the release of his mother Vinata by obtaining a cup of amrita. FTP, name this character who mocks the wind with his speed, known as the king of birds, who serves as Vishnu's part-eagle steed.

ANSWER: Garuda

Result: 2788 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57305

Question: When he died, his subjects invited his nephew to replace him in preference to his sons Nicostratus and Megapenthes. He was stuck for eight years in southern waters after insulting Athena, but finally escaped after donning a seal-skin and capturing the sleeping sea-god Proteus, who told him of his brother's murder. After killing Euphorbus, he helped Ajax guard and carry the body of Patroclus. This son of Aerope and Pleisthenes or Atreus succeeded to the throne of Sparta following the abdication of his father-in-law Tyndareus. FTP, name this brother of Agamemnon and husband of Helen.

ANSWER: Menelaus

Result: 2789 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 57306

Question: Her daughter was Hnoss, and her mother was sometimes said to be Nerthus. While searching for her husband, who went on long journeys, she wept tears of red gold. She loaned one of her possessions to Loki for a mission to rescue Idunn, and another item to Thor for a mission to rescue Mjollnir after it had been stolen by Thrym, who demanded her hand in marriage. She could transform into a falcon with her cloak, but she generally traveled in a chariot pulled by two cats. Accused by Loki of sleeping with every god in Asgard and every elf in Alfheim, FTP name this sexy Vanir love-goddess, the daughter of Njord.

ANSWER: Freya

Result: 2790 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 57307

Question: In Inca myth, Viracocha sent one called Ono Pacakoti against the giants that built Tiwanaku. In Mayan myth, one of these was assisted in its work by the birds Camulatz and Tecumbalam. In Hindu myth, the third avatar of Vishnu helped a brother of the Aswin twins with one of these. In Greek myth, one of these resulted in the birth of Python. In Norse myth, Bergelmir and his wife dealt with the one resulting from Ymir's death. In Sumerian myth, Ubaru-Tutu's son was taken to Dilmun after making use of a dove, a swallow, and a raven in dealing with one of these. The fish Matsya helped Manu Vivasvat survive, FTP, what type of catastrophe also survived by Utnapishtim, Pyrrha, and Deucalion?

ANSWER: floods or deluges

Result: 2791 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 57308

Question: In one story, this god gives advice to a serpent on capturing an eagle using the cadaver of a bull after the eagle breaks an oath of loyalty sworn before this god, who was identified with the Sumerian Utu. With Marduk and Ea he formed a triad of sympathetic gods who were thought to avert evil influences. He was guarded at Mount Mashu by the scorpion-people encountered by Gilgamesh, and in the epic of Gilgamesh he helps in the attack on Humbaba. Depicted on the stele of the Code of Hammurabi, FTP name this Babylonian solar god of justice.

ANSWER: Shamash

Result: 2792 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 57309

Question: According to some sources, the original name of this daughter of Icarius and the Naiad Periboea was Arnaea or Arnacia, but she won a new name when a flock of purple-striped ducks saved her from drowning. Her husband won her hand with the help of Tyndareus, who owed him for formulating the oath sworn by Helen's suitors. Her servant Eurycleia recognized her disguised husband by a scar on his thigh, but she did not know of his return until he strung his bow and shot an arrow through twelve axe-rings. For three years, she claimed to be working on a shroud for her father-in-law Laertes, buying time against the demands of her many suitors. FTP, name this mother of Telemachus, the wife of Odysseus.

ANSWER: Penelope (accept Arnaea or Arnacia before mention in the question)

Result: 2793 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 57310

Question: . In Slavic mythology, the three Zorya kept watch against the failure of one of these, which would result in the devouring of Ursa Minor and the destruction of the world. Herne the Hunter was said to make a dreadful noise with one of these, possibly identical with the golden one his king gave him as a reward during his life. The Irish god Oghma was depicted with golden ones connecting his tongue to the ears of his listeners, and the Irish god Aengus found his beloved Caer in the midst of 150 maidens bound by one of these items. FTP, name these items whose examples in Norse mythology included Dromi and Laeding, which were broken by Fenrir.

ANSWER: chains or fetters

Result: 2794 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 10 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57311

Question: In Ovid's Fasti, he is said to have created a beautiful garden for his wife, Flora. His children by the Harpy Podarge were given as wedding gifts to Peleus. He fell in love with a Spartan prince who was also beloved by the poet Thamyris and a god. In Apuleius's The Golden Ass, this father of the immortal horses Balius and Xanthus is credited with letting two evil sisters fall to their deaths after gently carrying their younger sister Psyche down to a beautiful valley. He is also credited with jealously taking a flung discus and dashing it against the head of Hyacinthus. FTP, name this brother of Boreas, the personified West Wind.

ANSWER: Zephyrus (accept Favonius until "Harpy Podarge"; accept the West Wind before the end)

Result: 2795 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 57312

Question: During a raid, he took 50 herds of cattle, 50 flocks of sheep, 50 droves of swine, 50 flocks of goats, and 150 chestnut mares from the Eleans, then killed the Elean commander Amarynceus. His son Antilochus was killed by Memnon after one of his chariot horses was shot by Paris. Apollo gave him the years taken from his maternal uncles, the sons of Niobe, so that he lived for 300 years. His son Pisistratus helped search for Odysseus after Telemachus came to this man's court at Pylos. FTP, name this son of Neleus who appears in the Iliad as a wise old man.

ANSWER: Nestor

Result: 2796 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57313

Question: She can often be found relaxing amid the white lotuses that grow in the five pools of a heaven made entirely of gold and precious jewels. She was reborn during the churning of the ocean, and later appeared as Dharani. One myth states that she had two co-wives before her husband grew tired of their quarreling and gave away Ganga and Sarasvati. She also appears as the cow-girl Radha and as a daughter of King Janaka who is born in a furrow of a plowed field. FTP, name this goddess of good wealth who was incarnated as Sita, the consort of Vishnu.

ANSWER: Lakshmi

Result: 2797 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57314

Question: This Thespian, who died at Donacon, was conceived when the River-god Cephisus ravished the blue Nymph Leiriope. He rejected Ameinius, sending Ameinius a sword with which Ameinius committed suicide on this man's threshold, calling on the gods for vengeance and garnering Artemis's sympathy. Teiresias predicted he "will live to a ripe old age, provided he never knows himself," but Artemis contrived for him to find an undisturbed spring, which proved his undoing. FTP, name this beautiful youth who fell in love with and died admiring his own reflection.

ANSWER: Narcissus

Result: 2798 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 57315

Question: He was given the task of sounding a trumpet shell with no holes in it, which he accomplished with the help of worms and bees. In return, he was given one long bone, over which he sprinkled some of his own blood to recreate humanity. He had earlier ruled over the world until a hurricane destroyed most of humanity and transformed the survivors into monkeys, ending the Second Sun. He immolated himself after becoming disgusted by his own body, which he saw in a mirror held by Tezcatlipoca. His heart then turned into a bird, or the morning star. FTP, name this Aztec god known as the Feathered Serpent.

ANSWER: Quetzalcoatl

Result: 2799 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57316

Question: In the Aeneid, the shade of Anchises describes this character marked with double plumes in his crest, the emblem of his father, and Vulcan makes a shield for Aeneas that depicts scenes from this character's infancy and his treaty with Titus Tatius. Important women in his life included his wife Hersilia and his foster mother Acca Larentia. Following his death, he was identified with the god Quirinus. He defeated his great-uncle Amulius with the help of his twin brother, but later killed that brother. FTP, name this son of Rhea Silvia and Mars, the founder of Rome. Ans: Romulus 6. King Phegeus of Psophis sent the necklace of Harmonia to one of this god's shrines, and Philoctetes dedicated his bow at Crimissa in a sanctuary to this god with the epithet "Distraught." This father of Idmon, Aristaeus and Mopsus built an altar made entirely of the horns of countless she-goats killed by his sister. During the Trojan War, he rescued the body of Sarpedon; earlier, he spat in Cassandra's mouth so that no one would believe her, after giving her the gift of prophecy. FTP name this god who killed the Python and appropriated the Delphic Oracle, the son of Zeus and Leto.

ANSWER: Romulus

Result: 2800 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 57317

Question: King Phegeus of Psophis sent the necklace of Harmonia to one of this god's shrines, and Philoctetes dedicated his bow at Crimissa in a sanctuary to this god with the epithet "Distraught." This father of Idmon, Aristaeus and Mopsus built an altar made entirely of the horns of countless she-goats killed by his sister. During the Trojan War, he rescued the body of Sarpedon; earlier, he spat in Cassandra's mouth so that no one would believe her, after giving her the gift of prophecy. FTP name this god who killed the Python and appropriated the Delphic Oracle, the son of Zeus and Leto.

ANSWER: Apollo

Result: 2801 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57318

Question: Shortly before her suicide, one man commented that she gave her two companions in a chariot the look of a ewe between two rams. She made a vow regarding the man she would love inspired by the sight of a raven drinking the blood of a calf being skinned in the snow. That man, one of the Sons of Uisneach, was Naoise, who was initially reluctant to steal her from Conchobar. While still in her mother's womb, she gave a great cry, leading the druid Cathbad to predict that, FTP, what beautiful woman of Irish myth would bring ruin and sorrow?

ANSWER: Deirdre or Derdriu of the Sorrows

Result: 2802 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57319

Question: One character of this name in Greek myth was a brother of Cadmus who traveled to what would later be Carthage, and then to Canaan, which was renamed in his honor. Another character of this name was cursed by his father Amyntor with childlessness and blindness, but had his sight restored with the help of Peleus. He was sent along with Ajax and Odysseus to offer gifts and the return of Briseis to Achilles. This name was also given to a creature known for flying to Heliopolis to deposit an egg made of myrrh containing the ashes of its predecessor. FTP, name this self-immolating bird.

ANSWER: Phoenix

Result: 2803 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 57320

Question: In one story, he takes the form of a seal to retrieve the stolen necklace of the Brisings. The giant Eggther holds a similar job to this god, who makes frequent use of an item buried under the third root of Yggdrasil. He has one son each by Amma, Mothir and Edda in the Rigsthula, those sons being Karl, Jarl and Thrall. He is sometimes identified as the son of Aegir's nine daughters, and it is said that he needs less sleep than a bird and can hear the wool growing on sheep. Charged with blowing the horn Gjall at Ragnarok, FTP name this watchman of the Aesir.

ANSWER: Heimdall or Gullintani (accept Rig until Rigsthula is mentioned; prompt afterwards)

Result: 2804 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57321

Question: He was found by a hero at the well of Pirene through the efforts of Athena or Poseidon. He was conceived as a result of his mother's tryst with Poseidon in a temple of Athena, and was born fully fledged along with his brother Chrysaor at the moment of his mother's beheading. According to Ovid, his stamping on Mount Helicon caused the fountain Hippocrene to gush forth. He aided a hero who was given the task of killing a monster with the tail of a serpent, the body of a goat, and a fire-breathing lion's head. FTP, name this son of Medusa, a winged horse ridden by Bellerophon.

ANSWER: Pegasus

Result: 2805 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 57322

Question: This god, whose role was similar to that of Wepwawet, appears briefly in The Golden Ass, where he is described as a "messenger between heaven and hell, displaying alternately a face black as night and golden as day." In one story, when Set disguised himself as a leopard, this god seized Set and branded him all over with a hot iron, then flayed him and wore his skin. He was sometimes considered the illegitimate son of Osiris by Nephthys, and he assisted Isis in her quest to find and embalm the body of Osiris. FTP, name this funerary deity with the head of a black dog or jackal.

ANSWER: Anubis

Result: 2806 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57323

Question: He summons a copper-clad midget of the water-folk to cut down an oak that blocks out the sun and moon. His rival offers him horses, boats and crossbows, but he refuses to relent until he is offered his rival's sister. At this point, his rival's teeth are stuck in a treetrunk, as this character has sunk his rival into a bog by singing. Aino drowns herself rather than marry him, and his steed is shot from under him by his rival Joukahainen. Later, in response to Louhi's requesting the forging of the Sampo, he promises to send the smith Ilmarinen. FTP, name this old hero of the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Väinämöinen

Result: 2807 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57324

Question: According to some sources, one character with this name was the daughter of Helen and Theseus. Another character of this name was lured with the promise of marriage to Achilles; according to some accounts, she did marry Achilles, and she, not Deidameia, became the mother of Neoptolemus. In another version of her story, she was taken to the kingdom of Thoas and became a priestess of Artemis. Calchas called for her death when her father's fleet remained windbound at Aulis. FTP, name this daughter of Clytemnestra, the sister of Electra.

ANSWER: Iphigenia

Result: 2808 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57325

Question: Among this character's prized possessions was his white horse, Uchchaisravas. His lust for Ahalya earned him the ire of the sage Gautama, who cursed him to bear on his body one thousand marks of the yoni, which were later transformed into eyes. This god was captured and ransomed by Meghanada, the son of Ravana, who acquired a new name and immortality as a result. He killed his father Dyaus as an encore to freeing the cloud cattle from a demon in the form of a dragon, a task he accomplished with the help of the maruts. FTP name this Vedic storm god who killed Vritra.

ANSWER: Indra

Result: 2809 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 57326

Question: The Mysian king Telegonus killed this man's son Thersander. This man's father-in-law was advised by the Oracle at Delphi to yoke a lion, which represented this man, and a boar, to a two-wheeled chariot. His father-in-law followed the advice, allowing this man to marry Aegeia and reconciling this man with Tydeus. His father-in-law Adrastus then summoned four more Argive chieftains to help this man reclaim his throne from his twin, who refused to step down after a year of ruling Thebes. His corpse was burned on a pyre, or buried, in defiance of Creon's orders, by his sister Antigone. FTP, name this twin brother of Eteocles.

ANSWER: Polyneices

Result: 2810 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 57327

Question: . In Korean myth, it was represented by Dalnim. A god associated with it killed the fertility goddess Ukemochi when she offended him by vomiting large quantities of food. The Ainu goddess Chup-Kamui spent one night in charge of it, but observed so much adulterous behavior, she begged off her post. In Chinese myth, it was associated with the goddess Heng O, who represented the cold and dark principle of yin, and was thought to be one of the primordial giant Pan-gu's eyes. FTP, name this luminous object associated with the Shinto god Tsuki-Yumi, whose bith from the right eye of Izanagi made him the brother of the solar goddess Amaterasu.

ANSWER: the moon

Result: 2811 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 57328

Question: This character stayed in Ulfdalir after his brothers left to follow their wives Hlathguth and Olrun. This brother of Slagfith and Egil killed two boys, set their skulls in silver as goblets, and fashioned a brooch from their teeth. He also raped Bodvild to complete his revenge on Nidud, who captured him, cut the sinews of his knee-joints, and forced him to create precious things. This story can be found in his namesake heroic lay in the Poetic Edda. FTP, name this character credited with creating the sword Balmung and the armor of Beowulf, a master smith of Germanic and English legend.

ANSWER: Wayland or Weyland or Völund or Velent the Smith

Result: 2812 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 57329

Question: The mother goddess of this people's pantheon, Hannahanna, once sent a bee to search for the missing god of agriculture, Telipinu. In one of the myths of these people, a diorite giant grows an acre in a month while hiding on the shoulder of Upelluri before his feet are cut off with the copper knife that separated the heavens from the earth. In that myth, known as the "Song of Ullikummi," Anu's cupbearer Kumarbi bites off Anu's genitals. The "Song of Ullikummi" and several other myths were borrowed from the Hurrians by, FTP, what ancient people who wrote of "the thousand gods of Hatti"?

ANSWER: Hittite

Result: 2813 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 57330

Question: One character of this name, a daughter of Adrastus, married Ilus and bore him Laomedon. Another character of this name was the sister or aunt of Hyacinthus, married Acrisius, and became the mother of Danae. In the Georgics, the death of a character of this name results in the deaths of the bees of Aristaeus, who tried to rape her near Tempe. In Ovid's Metamorphoses, the same character dies during her own wedding celebrations from a snakebite. Her husband tries to save her, but can't resist looking back before leaving the Underworld. FTP, give the name of the wife of Orpheus.

ANSWER: Eurydice

Result: 2814 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 11 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57331

Question: One of this character's brothers, a great fisherman, used to eat alone with his eyes closed because he could not stand to see his food diminish. In his home in Gnitaheath he kept the sword Hrotti, a helm of terror, and treasures cursed by a dwarf who took the form of a pike. His second brother, a smith, trained the hero who killed him, and requested a roasted piece of his heart, which granted wisdom, while a taste of his blood gave the ability to understand birds. He was slain by a hero who dug a pit along the path he used to slither to water, then pierced his scaly hide with the sword Gram. FTP, name this monstrous brother of Regin, a dragon slain by Sigurd.

ANSWER: Fafnir (accept Regin before "Gnitaheath")

Result: 2815 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 57332

Question: The dying Fafnir tells Sigurd that this figure will mix his blood with that of the Aesir on the island of Oskapt. In the Svipdagssmol, the sword Laevateinn is said to be guarded by this character's wife Sinmora. In the Voluspa, the seeress says that he will come from the south with the "spoiler of twigs," and only Hoddmimir's wood will survive his onslaught. His sword shines more brightly than the sun, and he will use it on the plain of Vigrid to kill the unarmed god Frey. FTP, name this sentinel of Muspellheim who will spread fire over the world at Ragnarok.

ANSWER: Surt or Surtur

Result: 2816 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57333

Question: . During a fire alarm, an older brother of Idaeus rushed to save it and was temporarily blinded for his troubles. The Pleiad Electra, after being violated by Zeus, defiled this item, which was found overgrown with weeds and half buried in front of the tent of Ilus. According to some accounts, it was fashioned from the bones of Pelops. It was usually described as a legless image three cubits high, carrying a distaff and spindle in the left hand and a spear in the right, with its chest wrapped in the aegis. Stolen by Odysseus and Diomedes, and said to carry the destiny of Troy, FTP name this statue fashioned by Athena in the likeness of her dead childhood playmate Pallas.

ANSWER: the Trojan Palladium

Result: 2817 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57334

Question: He was the son of the River-god Sangarios's daughter Nana, who conceived when she hid an almond or pomegranate in her lap. In a ritual reenactment of his death, a pine tree decked with wreaths of violets and swathed in woollen bands like a corpse was given blood offerings from priests who gashed themselves on the Day of Blood. He died when, in a fit of madness, he castrated himself. At Rome, the Hilaria was celebrated near the vernal equinox in honor of his annual resurrection. FTP name this figure of Phrygian mythology, the charioteer and consort of Cybele.

ANSWER: Attis

Result: 2818 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 57335

Question: This youngest of seven siblings had an older brother with a sword in place of a head and a trunk of stone. He had affairs with Minona and Gbadu, but he was found out and cursed with an eternal erection by his mother. This god, sometimes identified with the Yoruban Eshu, understands all languages. This son of Mawu also appears as a loa in voodoo belief, where he is invoked at the start of all ceremonies. FTP, name this trickster god of the Fon who, in voodoo belief, is often given the title Papa.

ANSWER: Legba

Result: 2819 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57336

Question: He shared an alternate name with the Greek rendering of the name of the deified Nile and with one of the sons of Horus. He had the image of a vulture with wings outstretched on his back and the image of a scarab on his tongue. Each of his movements had prophetic value, and crowds of the devout and the curious attended the spectacle of his daily frolic. He was also marked by a crescent moon on his right flank and a white triangle on his forehead. Thought to be the result of a union of Ptah in the form of a celestial fire with a virgin heifer, FTP name this sacred black bull of Memphis.

ANSWER: the Apis bull or Hapy or Hapi

Result: 2820 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 57337

Question: This character broke up the unions of his six sons and six daughters, fearing to infringe on the Olympic prerogative of incest. In the Aeneid, Juno promises the nymph Deiopea to this son of Arne and Poseidon in return for his help against the fleet of Aeneas. In the Odyssey, Odysseus visits his island twice, but this father-in-law of Ceyx proves inhospitable the second time after Odysseus's men, hoping for wine, untie the silver cord from a special bag given by this character to Odysseus. Before the bag was untied, only Zephyrus was free to act. FTP, name this immortal who was placed in charge of the winds.

ANSWER: Aeolus

Result: 2821 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57338

Question: She reigned for nine years as Queen of the Southern Seas. She is sometimes shown with multiple heads, recalling a myth that her Indian counterpart's head exploded in eleven pieces when he contemplated the wicked people of the world. Worshippers in her temple at the Mount of the Wondrous Peak use rattles and firecrackers to attract her attention. This goddess, known as Observer of All Sounds, is often depicted with her acolytes Gold Youth and Jade Maiden, and is often worshipped by childless women. FTP, name this deity who grew out of the bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, the Chinese goddess of mercy and compassion.

ANSWER: Kwan-yin or Guan-Yin (prompt on Kannon)

Result: 2822 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57339

Question: According to one myth, his jaw was injured shortly after his birth when a god threw a thunderbolt at him, but his father soon avenged him by entering the bodies of all the gods and giving them colic. His battle roar could shatter enemies, but he threw the giant Kalanemi to his death and killed Saurasa by allowing her to swallow him and then swelling up to the size of a mountain. He once swallowed the moon to keep it from affecting some magic herbs he was bringing from the Himalayas, and at his birth he thought the sun was a fruit and tried to catch and eat it. FTP, name this son of Anjana and Vayu who set fire to all of Lanka after Ravana set fire to his tail, a monkey general in the Ramayana.

ANSWER: Hanuman

Result: 2823 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 57340

Question: According to some sources, this man was responsible for the stench of the river Anigrus, having thrown into it the foul objects he used to purify the daughters of Proetus. This grandson of Cretheus was the first mortal to temper wine with water and the first to practice as a physician. He obtained Phylacus's cattle, enabling the marriage of his cousin Pero to his brother Bias, and cured the impotence of Iphiclus using the rust from a knife. FTP, name this first mortal to be granted prophetic powers who overheard two woodworms discussing the collapse of the roof of his prison cell.

ANSWER: Melampus

Result: 2824 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57341

Question: She carries off Aeschere, an act of blood vengeance, and has a chance to kill her son's killer when she knocks him down, sits on him, and attacks with a sword, but his armor saves him. That killer finds a weapon in her home which he uses to kill her and behead her son's corpse. The weapon is a sword made by the giants, which her foe picks up after the blade Hrunting fails to damage her. This descendant of Cain is tracked to her home in a mere from the hall of Heorot after she travels there to retrieve her son's severed arm. FTP, name this monster who, like her son, dies at the hands of Beowulf.

ANSWER: Grendel's mother

Result: 2825 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 57342

Question: These people believed in a shape-shifting monster made of ice, or ice and mud, which was the namesake of a cannibalistic psychosis. They also believed that the human race was founded by the Muskrat and her husband, the son of Kabun. They feared the Wendigo, and worshipped the earth goddess Grandmother Nokomis, as well as a culture hero known as the Great Hare, Michabo. FTP, name these people whose strength prompted the hero Hiawatha to band together the Iriquois Nations.

ANSWER: Algonquins

Result: 2826 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57343

Question: According to certain oral traditions, this god rolled along on land using his three legs, always surrounded by a magic mist. He kept his prized knife and shirt, as well as the bones of Asal's swine, in his Crane Bag. He possessed magic swine which returned to life each day after being killed and eaten with Goibniu's ale of immortality. He shook his magic cloak between Cuchulainn and his wife to keep Cuchulainn from ever seeing Fand again. His other possessions included the ship Wave-Sweeper and a chariot pulled by two horses that could run over water. FTP name this Irish sea-god, the son of Lir, who was identified with the Welsh Manawydan.

ANSWER: Manannan mac Lir

Result: 2827 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57344

Question: In this character's sanctuary at Pergamus, the name of Telephus's son Eurypylus could never be spoken, since Eurypylus had killed this character's son Machaon. His mother, the daughter of Ixion's brother Phlegyas, gave in to a secret passion for Ischys, and the indiscretion was reported to his father by a crow. Athena gave one or two vials of the blood of Medusa to this son of Coronis, who worked on Hippolytus at the behest of Artemis. This father of Hygieia was killed after Hades complained to Zeus about losing subjects. FTP, name this son of Apollo who gained the power to resurrect the dead.

ANSWER: Asclepius

Result: 2828 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57345

Question: Her father seeks advice from an oracle in Albunea after a portent in which this character's hair and crown seem wreathed in flame, signaling her destined fame and the strife she would cause. Drances counsels her father to give her in marriage to a foreign prince, angering the brother of Juturna. She eventually marries that foreign prince and becomes the mother of Silvius despite the objections of her mother Amata. Silvius eventually becomes king of Alba Longa, succeeding her son-in-law Iülus. FTP, name this daughter of Latinus who marries Aeneas.

ANSWER: Lavinia

Result: 2829 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 57346

Question: This god was traveling with Loki and Odin when Loki killed Otter, and when Thiazi flew off with Loki. In the Voluspo, he is credited with giving sense to Ask and Embla, and it is prophecied that he will survive Ragnarok and gain the power of foretelling the future. This god is noted for his long-leggedness, and for his annoying habit of frequently saying, "Let others decide," which led to the decapitation of his advisor. FTP, name this Norse god who proved himself useless in council among the Vanir after being given to them as a hostage with Mimir.

ANSWER: Honir or Hoenir or Haenir

Result: 2830 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 57347

Question: Dionysus prophecied that this woman and her husband would ride in a chariot drawn by heifers and rule over barbarian hordes. Late in life, she and her husband were given rule of Illyria by their daughter Agave. Amphiaraus's wife Eriphyle was bribed on two separate occasions with treasures that had been given as wedding presents to this woman. One of those presents was a robe given by Athena; the other, given by this woman's mother Aphrodite, was an item which rendered its wearer irresistibly beautiful. FTP, name this woman noted for her magic necklace, the wife of Cadmus.

ANSWER: Harmonia

Result: 2831 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 57348

Question: In some accounts, one character of this name was a sister of Morgause and Morgan le Fay. A second character of this name had a great-uncle named Garlon who could become invisible while armed, and a grandfather who suffered the Dolorous Stroke at the hands of Balin. A third character of this name, known as the Maid of Astolat, died of grief and was floated on a barge to Camelot. The father of the second character of this name used a magic potion to make his daughter look like Guinevere, fooling Lancelot into sleeping with her. FTP, give the name of the daughter of Pelles who became the mother of Galahad.

ANSWER: Elaine

Result: 2832 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 57349

Question: In the Homeric Hymn to this figure, she is said to be the mother by Zeus of Pandia. Her younger sister was cursed with perpetual longing for young mortals after Aphrodite caught Ares in her sister's bed. This goddess fell in love with the mortal son of Zeus and Calyce, and had fifty daughters by him. This daughter of Theia first spotted her lover in a cave on Mount Latmus, and Hypnos later granted her lover the power of sleeping with his eyes open. FTP, name this daughter of Hyperion and sister of Eos and Helius, a Greek moon-goddess.

ANSWER: Selene

Result: 2833 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 57350

Question: According to one tradition, he was born when a god sometimes called the "Great He-She" spat him out. Treated in some texts as deified emptiness, he was identified with the god Anhur, and wore an ostrich feather on his head. After being attacked in his palace of At Nub by the children of Apep, this second divine pharaoh abdicated his throne. Due to jealousy born of incestuous passion, or on his father's orders, he slipped between his two children and violently separated them, supporting his daughter's belly on his outstretched arms. FTP, name this god of air, the husband of Tefnut and father of Geb and Nut.

ANSWER: Shu

Result: 2834 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 12 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57351

Question: In Sumerian myth, there were seven of these, known as the Anunnaki. The title Un-nefer was given to a member of the Ennead of Heliopolis in recognition of his work in this capacity. In Hindu belief, the scribe Chitragupta helped the twin brother of Yamuna with his work in this role. In later Egyptian mythology, 42 auxiliary deities served this function in the Hall of the Two Truths in Duat. In Greek myth, the son of Zeus and Aegina shared this job with two sons of Zeus and Europa. In Egyptian myth, the demon Ammit and the feather of Maat played roles in the work of, FTP, what sort of netherworld functionary, a role shared by Yama, Osiris, Aeacus, Minos, and Rhadamanthys?

ANSWER: judges of the underworld or judges of the dead (accept equivalents)

Result: 2835 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 57352

Question: This son of Laomedon governed the province of Persia for the Assyrian king Teutamus. His half-brother Priam gave him a golden vine as a bribe to get him to send his son Memnon the Ethiopian into the Trojan War. He became the lover of Astraeus's wife, a goddess who was the mother of the four winds. That goddess had previously had affairs with Cleitus, Cephalus, and Orion. His lover locked him in a room after she convinced Zeus to grant him immortality, but forgot to ask for eternal youth. FTP, name this man who had an affair with Eos before turning into a cicada.

ANSWER: Tithonus

Result: 2836 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57353

Question: He once sent the husband of Cigfa a present of pigs. Angered over the theft of a lapwing, a dog, and a roebuck, he instigated the Battle of the Trees, which he lost to Amaethon and Gwydion. He threatened a prince with being satirized to the value of a hundred stags for a breach of hunting etiquette, but relented when the prince agreed to do him the favor of delivering one blow to his rival, Hafgan. To accomplish Hafgan's death, he ruled Dyfed for a year in Pwyll's place. FTP, name this Celtic god of agriculture and death, the Lord of Annwn.

ANSWER: Arawn

Result: 2837 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57354

Question: As a result of losing a gambling match, they had to spend twelve years in exile in a forest, then a thirteenth year in a city without being recognized. They took their name from a son of Ambalika, who turned pale at the sight of a certain hermit. Two of them were born to Madri after she prayed to the Aswans. The eldest was a son of Yama, and the second-oldest, a son of Vayu, used a mace to smash the thigh of Duryodhana, the leader of a group of one hundred brothers whom they fought at Kurukshetra. Bhima and Yudisthira were members of, FTP, what group of five brothers featured in the Mahabharata in opposition to the Kauravas?

ANSWER: Pandavas

Result: 2838 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 57355

Question: Unlike her sisters Amphinome and Evadne, she refused to shed the blood of her father when Medea falsely promised to restore Pelias to youth if he consented to being cut up. Pelias promised her to the man who could yoke a boar and a lion to a chariot and drive once around a race-course, a feat accomplished with the help of a god who was her husband's herdsman for a year. In gratitude for his kind treatment, Apollo not only helped her husband win her hand, he also once gained her husband a temporary reprieve by getting the Fates drunk. She then voluntarily took her husband's place, but was rescued by Heracles or sent back by Persephone. FTP, name this woman who died for her husband Admetus.

ANSWER: Alcestis

Result: 2839 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57356

Question: Partway through his six years in his mother's womb, he vowed never to run in fear from fire or iron. Later in life, he married the same wish-maiden who brought the magical apple of fertility that resulted in his birth. His wife Hljod bore him ten sons and a daughter, and that daughter later predicted his death at the hands of the King of Gautland, Siggeir. This son of King Rerir built his palace around a large tree, known as the Barnstock, out of which one of his sons drew a sword thrust into the trunk by Odin. FTP, name this namesake of a Norse saga, the father of Sigmund.

ANSWER: Volsung

Result: 2840 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 57357

Question: In one creation myth, a goddess associated with this creature divided herself, producing Woman of the Hard Substances, who became the always-bride of Tawa. A god associated with this creature won a box full of stories from his father with the help of his wife Aso. A daughter of Idmon of Colophon who depicted the illicit love affairs of the Olympians was turned into one of these after hanging herself. The Hopi mother goddess, the Lakota trickster figure Iktomi, and the Ashanti god Anansi were all associated with, FTP, what type of creature into which the jealous Athena transformed the weaver Arachne?

ANSWER: spider

Result: 2841 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57358

Question: One character in this work is abandoned after being born with white hair, but he is found and raised by a creature so ancient, it has seen the destruction of the world three times over. That character's son shows early signs of greatness by clubbing a white elephant to death. This poem also sees the mighty Raksh become the chosen steed of a hero who slays the White Deev and uses its blood to restore the sight of Kay Kavous. Later, that hero unknowingly kills his son Sohrab. FTP, name this epic whose characters include Kay Khosrau and Rostam, composed by Ferdowsi.

ANSWER: Shahnameh or Shahnama or Epic of Kings or Book of Kings

Result: 2842 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57359

Question: . In the Lokasenna she is credited with placing a poison-snake over the bound form of Loki as part of his torment. As a result of her father's death, she married the lord of Noatun, but she soon returned to Thrymheim. Her father's death came while he was in the form of an eagle, pursuing a falcon carrying a nut. The nut was the shape-shifted Idunn, who had been kidnapped by this goddess's father. She was given her choice of the available gods as a husband, but she had to choose based solely on the appearance of their feet. FTP, name this daughter of Thiazi who married Njord.

ANSWER: Skadi

Result: 2843 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 57360

Question: He purified Pelops's son Copreus from murder, and employed Copreus as a herald. He was born prematurely to Nicippe after Zeus swore an oath that any prince born to the House of Perseus before nightfall should be High King. This son of Sthenelus refused to give his cousin credit for a task in which his cousin was aided by Iolaus. He took to sending orders to his cousin by messenger while hiding in a bronze urn underground after seeing the corpse of the Nemean Lion. FTP, name this man who set twelve labors for his cousin Heracles.

ANSWER: Eurystheus

Result: 2844 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57361

Question: Vishnu once saved them, appearing in the form of Narmada and routing their enemies, the Gandharvas. One of them named Kaliya terrorised the herdsmen near his home in the River Jumna until he was defeated by the young Krishna. These descendants of Kadru and the sage Kasyapa wear the best gems of the three worlds in hoods above their heads, lighting up the darkness of the underworld, Patala. Their king, known as Ananta or Sesha, is a symbol of eternity, especially when he holds his tail in his mouth. FTP, name these serpent demons of Hindu mythology.

ANSWER: nagas

Result: 2845 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 57362

Question: On one occasion, two-thirds of the brain of Mes Gegra were slung into this man's head, requiring stitches from his physician Fingen. He was conceived when his mother asked his father, who was passing by, what the day was good for, to which his father replied that it was good for begetting a king upon a queen. He was the half-brother of Dechtire and the son of Queen Ness and the druid Cathbad. Protected by the Red Branch Knights, FTP name this king who ruled from his palace at Emain Macha, the uncle of Cuchulainn.

ANSWER: Conchobar mac Nessa

Result: 2846 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57363

Question: He spread a rumor that Heracles was a habitual and perverse cross-dresser following an incident in which he stealthily attempted to rape Omphale, but chose the wrong couch. He made a gift of seven swift Spartan hounds and three lop-eared hounds to the young Artemis. He made strategic use of some well-washed white fleeces in seducing Selene. A sailor named Thamus heard a divine voice proclaiming the death of this god. FTP, name this Arcadian god who pursued the nymph Syrinx, known for his namesake reed pipes and goatish appearance.

ANSWER: Goat-Pan

Result: 2847 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57364

Question: While she was in charge of the universe, people subsisted on cencocopi or teocentli seeds. She was sometimes thought to be the wife of the primordial god Xiuhtecuhtli, but she was more commonly considered the wife of another god by whom she was the mother of the lunar god Tecciztecatl. This patroness of childbirth presided over the Fourth Sun, which ended when she transformed people into fish and sent a great flood. Known as "She of the Jade Skirt," FTP name this Aztec goddess of water and wife of Tlaloc.

ANSWER: Chalchiuhtlicue

Result: 2848 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57365

Question: This man defended his kingdom against an invading army with the help of his nephews, the Moliones, who wounded Iphicles during the fighting. He banished his eldest son Phyleus from Elis after refusing to pay a hero on the grounds that the River-gods Peneius or Menius and Alpheus had done all the work. By divine dispensation, his animals were inimitably fertile, immune to disease, and never miscarried. The Peloponnese suffered a pestilence originating in the stench from his sheep folds and cattle yards, which were deep in dung. FTP, name this man whose filthy stables were cleaned by Heracles.

ANSWER: King Augeias

Result: 2849 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 57366

Question: This brother of Eurybia and Thaumus was an uncle of Ladon and the Harpies. Like Danaus, he gave his name to his fifty daughters. In the Iliad, Hephaestus mentions being saved by Eurynome and one of this character's daughters after being thrown off Olympus by Hera. Some of this character's daughters helped Theseus retrieve the golden signet ring of Minos. After being caught sleeping beside the Po, this son of Pontus helped Heracles by giving advice on obtaining the golden apples of the Hesperides. FTP, name this husband of Doris and father of Amphitrite and Thetis, an old man of the sea.

ANSWER: Nereus (accept Phorcys before "fifty daughters" is read)

Result: 2850 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 57367

Question: His death is signaled by blood leaking from his comb. He succeeds in bridling the Demon's bay horse and in skiing for the Demon's elk before he falls victim to the revenge of Dripcap, who tosses a water snake through his left armpit, heart, and liver. He is reassembled with the help of a rake with prongs one hundred fathoms long, and his mother then smears him with mead and honey to resurrect him. FTP, name this hero whose death while preparing to shoot one arrow at a swan on the black river of Tuonela is described in the Kalevala.

ANSWER: Lemminkäinen

Result: 2851 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 57368

Question: This god was the son of the nymph Canens and Picus, who was transformed into a woodpecker. During the secret rites of Bona Dea, the words "wine" and "myrtle" could not be spoken because this father of Bona Dea once got her drunk on wine, then beat her with a myrtle stick. By some accounts, he was a king of Latium who sacrificed strangers at the altar of Hermes, but was killed by Heracles, who then begot Latinus on this character's widow or daughter. According to Ovid, he was the father of Acis. As a fertility god, he was associated with the festival of Lupercalia. FTP, name this Roman equivalent of Pan with a name similar to that of the creatures who accompanied him, the Roman analogue of satyrs.

ANSWER: Faunus (accept Fatuus)

Result: 2852 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 57369

Question: In one tale an Egyptian magician made two wax images of these creatures come to life and write down 35 good and 35 bad stories. Horus's son Hapy, the guardian of mummified lungs, was sometimes depicted with the head of one of these creatures. One god associated with the moon assumed this form while traveling through the Nubian desert in the myth of the Distant Goddess. The lunar deity Khonsu also assumed this form in his aspect as the Keeper of the Books of the End of the Year, and was sometimes identified with one of these creatures shown perched on the scales of Maat. The god Babi was endowed with the aggressive virility of a dominant male one. FTP, name these simians associated with Thoth.

ANSWER: baboons

Result: 2853 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 57370

Question: This priest of Thymbraean Apollo angered Apollo by breaking a vow of chastity and lying with his wife Antiope in the god's sight. His people, having stoned their priest of Poseidon nine years earlier, selected this son of Antenor by lot to propitiate Poseidon, but before he could perform the sacrifice he was killed by Porces and Chariboea, or Curissia, or Periboea, two monsters sent from Tenedos and the Calydnian islands. Shortly before his death, he nearly killed Neoptolemus when he threw his spear into the flank of the Trojan Horse. FTP, name this man Trojan who died trying to save his twin sons from two great sea-serpents.

ANSWER: Laocoön

Result: 2854 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 13 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57371

Question: The sexless kurgarru and kalaturru were sent to negotiate with and flatter this goddess. This goddess's younger sister once tried to claim rulership of this goddess's domain after entering a temple of lapis lazuli dedicated to this goddess, or else paid a visit on the occasion of the death of this goddess's husband Gugalanna, the Bull of Heaven. She told her porter Neti to let her sister in, but forced her sister to strip off clothes and jewels at each of seven gates, then killed her when she was naked. FTP, name this ruler of the Great Below and sister of Inanna, the Sumerian death goddess.

ANSWER: Ereshkigal

Result: 2855 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 56812

Question: He punished a daughter of the river Almon by striking her mute. That daughter, a Naiad named Lara, later became the mother of the Lares. Lara angered this god, who was equated with the Etruscan god Tinia, by revealing that he was having an affair with a princess of the Rutuli, whom he turned into a nymph. The sacred thunder-stone of Terminus was kept under a hole in the roof of a temple of this god, whose titles included "Feretrius," "Stator," and "Optimus Maximus." The symbols of this brother of Vesta and Ceres were the eagle and a cluster of thunderbolts. FTP, name this king of the gods in Roman mythology, identified with the Greek Zeus.

ANSWER: Jupiter or Jove

Result: 2856 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 56813

Question: The Japanese spirit known as the baku was depicted with the head of a lion, the paws of a tiger, and the body of this creature. Hecate was often depicted with the heads of this creature, a dog, and a lion or snake. Efnisien insulted Matholwch by mutilating several of these creatures. Manannan mac Lir's daughter Niamh owned one named Embarr, which could travel over waves. These animals were associated with the Celtic goddess Epona. Epeius suggested constructing a large wooden model of, FTP, what type of animal, which the Greeks used to infiltrate Troy?

ANSWER: horse

Result: 2857 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 56814

Question: On one occasion, this character killed nine men by chanting a spell to recover his stolen harp, which was known as "Oak of Two Greens" and "Four-Angled Music." On another occasion, this son of Danu was temporarily unable to consummate his lust for the daughter of Indech because he had been forced to eat too much of his beloved porridge by the Fomorians. His weapon had to be dragged on wheels; one end could kill nine men with one blow, while the other end of his club could revive the dead. FTP name this father of Aengus and Bodb Dearg, known as the good god.

ANSWER: the Dagda Samildanac or Dagda mór mac Eladan or Dagda mór mac Eithenn or Eochaidh Ollathair or In Ruad Rofhessa

Result: 2858 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 56815

Question: This son of Thoösa fell in love with a daughter of Doris and tried to make himself more presentable by combing his hair with a rake and shaving with a scythe. The Nereid he loved shared her name with a living ivory image of Aphrodite carved by Pygmalion. He had his first experience with alcohol when he tried some heady wine given by Maro to one of his prisoners, who introduced himself as "Oudeis." According to Ovid, he crushed Acis with a rock for love of Galatea. He is better known for braining and eating six crewmen of a certain Greek hero, who got revenge and then escaped under his sheep. FTP, name this Cyclops who was blinded by Odysseus.

ANSWER: Polyphemus

Result: 2859 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 56816

Question: The dead were thought to spend eternity adoring this god in his roofless temples, and all creatures were thought to "sleep as though dead" during his nightly absence. He was depicted with many hands seizing offerings, or presenting the hieroglyphs of strength and life to the royal family. Those hands appeared at the tips of beams emanating from a central red disk. Worship of this god was promoted from a new capital city built in his honor, now known as Tel-el-Amarna. Defined as the light coming from the solar disk, FTP name this god whose monotheistic cult was promoted by Nefertiti's husband.

ANSWER: Aten or Aton or Adon or Eton

Result: 2860 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56817

Question: In honor of this goddess, Leucippe built a man-headed mechanical boar made of gold which, when pursued, took refuge in her temple and uttered the words "Spare me!" The younger Aloeid pledged to outrage this goddess, who succeeded in getting Otus and Ephialtes to kill each other by darting between them in the form of a white doe. Oeneus earned the enmity of this goddess when he omitted her in a customary sacrifice; in retaliation, she sent the Calydonian boar to ravage his crops. A son of Aristaeus was killed by his pack of fifty hounds after seeing her bathing. FTP, name this goddess who transformed Actaeon into a stag, the twin sister of Apollo.

ANSWER: Artemis

Result: 2861 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 56818

Question: For fourteen years, this character's sandals are kept on the throne by his half-brother, the son of Kaikeyi. He kills Khara, the younger brother of Surpanakha, but is outwitted by Surpanakha's older brother. This son of Kausalya and Dasaratha wins his wife in a contest by breaking Shiva's bow. He kills Bali as a favor to Sugriva, who supports this half-brother of Lakshmana with an army of monkeys. FTP, name this seventh incarnation of Vishnu who defeats Ravana and rescues his wife Sita in his namesake epic.

ANSWER: Ramachandra

Result: 2862 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 56819

Question: In one story, he is brought to one knee by Elli, and creates the ebb tide when he takes three enormous swigs from an enchanted drinking horn. This happens after he and his companions spend a night in the glove of Skrymir. One of those companions was his bondservant Thialfi, who loses a footrace to Thought. On his daily trip to the Well of Urd he wades across the Kormt and the Ormt rivers since he cannot cross Bifrost. At other times, he rides in a chariot pulled by two magic goats. FTP, name this strongest of the Aesir who killed lots of giants with his hammer.

ANSWER: Thor

Result: 2863 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 56820

Question: This man's mother, a daughter of Pittheus, travelled to Troy with Helen as one of her slave-women. This man was claimed as an ancestor of the Ioxids, who burn neither rushes nor wild asparagus, but venerate both, according to Plutarch; this line of descendants came from his dalliance with Perigune, the daughter of Sinis. This son of Aethra killed Sinis, nicknamed the Pine-Bender, and Sinis's father Procrustes. FTP, name this hero who used a magical ball of thread to navigate the Labyrinth, credited with killing the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Theseus

Result: 2864 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 56821

Question: He defeated an alarmingly large, speckled feline known as Palug's Cat. In the tale of Culhwch and Olwen, he traps Dillus Farfawg in a pit in order to pluck Dillus's beard with wooden tweezers, but becomes indignant when his lord satirizes him in a verse. Earlier in that tale, in his role as porter he tries to turn away Culhwch at the gate of the court of his lord, Culhwch's cousin. In later stories, he is the son of a wealthy knight who takes in and raises the step-son of Gorlois. While fighting in a tournament, he forgets to bring his sword, leading to his foster brother pulling out a sword from a stone. FTP, name this rather churlish knight, the son of Sir Ector and foster brother of Arthur.

ANSWER: Sir Kay or Cei

Result: 2865 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 56822

Question: According to some accounts, he was the brother of Abderus and son of Opian Menoetius. He fled to his uncle's court after killing Amphidamas's son Cleitonymus, or Aeanes, over a game of dice. He killed the Paeonian king Pyraechmes, saving the ship of Protesilaus. Apollo held him back from taking Troy single-handedly, and later grimly unlaced the fastenings of his corselet. He killed Zeus's son Sarpedon, but fell shortly afterwards by the hand of Hector, inciting the wrath of his cousin. FTP, name this constant companion of Achilles.

ANSWER: Patroclus

Result: 2866 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 56823

Question: As Mother Hubur, she produced a rabid dog, a fish-man, a scorpion-man, umu-demons, and an ¬ugallu¬-demon. Kishar and Anshar were her children by her first consort, the deified sweet waters, while she symbolized the primordial salt waters. Men were created from the blood of her second consort, to whom she bound the Tablets of Destiny. This dragon-goddess took Kingu as her second consort after the death of Apsu. FTP, name this mother-goddess whose body was split to form the heavens and the earth in Babylonian mythology.

ANSWER: Tiamat

Result: 2867 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 56824

Question: One of these characters planted a pair of flowers which sprouted with a prophetic poem written on the petals. Another was cremated by an apprentice while his soul was traveling; when his soul returned, he was forced to inhabit the body of a sick man with a lame leg, explaining his attribute of an iron crutch. Another of these characters, a patron of barbers, experienced the "Yellow Millet Dream." After following advice given in a dream to eat powdered mica, the sole female of the group, He Xiangu, gained the power of flight and immunity from death. FTP, name this octet of deities from Taoist legend.

ANSWER: Eight Immortals or Ba Xian or Pa Hsien

Result: 2868 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 56825

Question: The shepherd Molorchus sacrificed to Savior Zeus in celebration of this creature's death. According to some sources, the Bambinaeans suffered the depradations of this creature, which was born by Selene and then dropped from the moon. Its killer used a net to cover one of the two entrances to its cave, then strangled it after failing to wound it with various weapons. Its skin was proof against iron, bronze, and stone, and its killer finally skinned it with its own claws, then wore its pelt as a cloak. FTP, name this creature killed by Hercules, a monstrous feline.

ANSWER: Nemean Lion

Result: 2869 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 56827

Question: Once, when this man was a baby, a stream of ants carried grains of wheat up the side of his cradle and placed them between his lips while he slept. He founded the city of Ancyra after the death of his adoptive father Gordius. He committed suicide by drinking bull's blood after learning that everyone was aware of his disgrace, which he tried to hide with a Phrygian cap. His kind treatment of Silenus earned him a reward, but he soon visited the river Pactolus to wash away the gift. FTP, name this king who asked Dionysus for the gift of the golden touch.

ANSWER: Midas

Result: 2870 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 56828

Question: In one story, one of these creatures utters a terrible scream each Mayday, causing miscarriages and spreading barrennness over an entire island. In that story, Lleuelys advises Llud to use a vatful of good mead covered by silk to capture two of these creatures in the form of two piglets. Those two creatures were later responsible for the subsidence of a hill in Snowdonia, confounding the construction of a stronghold for Vortigern. Another one, which began ravaging the countryside after a serving-man stole a cup from it while it was sleeping, was killed with the help of Wiglaf. Beowulf was killed by, FTP, what type of creature mentioned in the title of Uther?

ANSWER: dragons

Result: 2871 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 56829

Question: The Dakinis are attendants of this goddess. She lends her name to the current age, in which kings inflict death on women, children and cows, and Dharma is one-legged and helpless. She has a tusked face with a fearsome brow bearing a third eye, and by some accounts, she sprang from the brow of Durga. To defeat the demon Raktavira, she had to hold him up, pierce him with a spear, and drink all his blood, sparking her thirst for blood. She is often depicted with her tongue protruding in her blood-smeared face, wearing a belt of demon hands, earrings made from the corpses of children, and a skull necklace. FTP, name this black goddess worshipped by the Thuggee, the terrible aspect of Shiva's wife Devi.

ANSWER: Kali

Result: 2872 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 56830

Question: He offered a golden crown to any bull that could beat Agelaus's champion bull, and soon after awarded the crown to Ares without complaint. Prior to his birth, his mother dreamed that she gave birth to a firebrand from which wriggled a horde of fiery serpents. His fairness in rewarding Ares led to his being selected to settle a dispute on Mount Gargarus in which he was offered dominion over Asia by one claimant, but he decided in favor of Aphrodite, who promised him the fairest woman in the world. FTP, name this Trojan prince who stole Helen from Menelaus.

ANSWER: Paris or Alexander or Alexandros

Result: 2873 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 2 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 56831

Question: His domain was sometimes said to contain a tree with breast-shaped fruit, which was the destination of children who died young. The few survivors from his turn as supreme deity were transformed into dogs, turkeys and butterflies at the end of the Third Sun. People headed for his domain were buried with a stick, which would immediately sprout flowers and leaves in his paradise, which accepted people who had died by dropsy. Often portrayed pouring water from a vessel, FTP name this Aztec god who received annual sacrifices of drowned children.

ANSWER: Tlaloc

Result: 2874 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 56832

Question: During a battle, a half-brother of this character targeted him with a javelin possessed by a snake once injured by this character, but the snake's hatred caused the javelin to fly too fast. He made such an impression on a King of the Panchalas whom he captured that the king asked Brahma for a daughter who would marry this son of Indra. This killer of Karna shot 5 arrows through a ring to win the hand of that king's daughter, Draupadi. FTP, name this warrior prince featured in the Bhagavad Gita along with his charioteer Krishna.

ANSWER: Arjuna

Result: 2875 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 56833

Question: She was identified with the destructive heat of the sun, raining down plague with her arrows, and her cult became associated with bone-setters. A calendar warns against seeing a mouse on the 12th Tybi, a hostile day, because on that day, Hathor or this goddess was given a terrible order by Ra. She was distracted from her task by seeing her reflection in seven thousand jugs of pomegranate juice mixed with beer, then got too drunk to continue slaughtering mankind. Worshipped as the wife of Ptah in Memphis, FTP name this fierce goddess of war, portrayed with the head of a lioness.

ANSWER: Sekhmet or Sakhmis

Result: 2876 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 56834

Question: Seven of these creatures, known as the Gasterocheires, accompanied Proetus from Lycia to Tiryns, which they helped fortify. Three of them were freed when one of their nephews, following a prophecy made by their mother, killed Campe, the monster set to guard them. Those three were later killed by Apollo in revenge for the death of Asclepius. Later generations lived as lawless shepherds, having lost the art of smithcraft possessed by Steropes, Brontes, and Arges, whose works included the bow of Artemis, and the trident of Poseidon. Also responsible for making Zeus's thunder bolts, FTP name these one-eyed giants.

ANSWER: Cyclopes or Cyclops

Result: 2877 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 56835

Question: His grandfathers were Tadg of the Luminous Side and Trénmór. He received a second name from Conn of the Hundred Battles after being known as Deimne in his childhood. As an older man, he was promised the hand of Gráinne, but she ran off with one of the warriors under his command. He was reared in the forest of Sliab Bladma by the Grey One of Luachra and his aunt Bodhmall after his father was killed by Goll Mac Morna. In later life, he was able to find the answers to many questions by chewing his thumb, which he burned cooking a magic fish. FTP, name this Irish hero who gained wisdom from the Salmon of Knowledge.

ANSWER: Finn MacCool or Finn mac Cumaill (accept Deimne before mention in the question)

Result: 2878 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 56836

Question: According to some accounts, she killed the sons of her son-in-law Polymnestor and plucked out Polymnestor's eyes, then transformed herself into a creature named Maera. Other accounts state that she died and was buried at a site called "The Bitch's Tomb." In the first version, she attacks Polymnestor for killing her son Polydorus; in the second version, this former queen dies after being made the slave of Odysseus. Her 19 sons included the prophet Helenus, and Troilus. FTP name this mother of Paris, the wife of the Trojan king Priam.

ANSWER: Hecuba or Hecabe

Result: 2879 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56837

Question: His wife was the daughter of Nep, and his son was renowned for settling disputes in the hall Glitnir. The giant Vafthrudnir was stumped by a riddle asking what this character's father whispered into his ear on a certain occasion. That occasion saw the death of the dwarf Lit on a ship launched by the ogress Hyrrokkin. Skadi chose Njord on the basis of Njord's clean white feet, hoping she would get this god. FTP, name this resident of the hall Breidablik and husband of Nanna whose death came at the hands of his blind brother Hodur.

ANSWER: Baldur

Result: 2880 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 56838

Question: When this man died, Artemis turned all but two of his grieving sisters into guinea fowl. One of the two sisters who retained her human form was later abducted by the lecherous Nessus, after marrying Heracles. He married Idas's daughter Cleopatra, but fell in love with a woman who was determined not to marry. When his mother learned that he had killed Toxeus and Plexippus, she killed him by setting fire to the contents of a chest. FTP, name this hero whose mother Althaea was told by the Fates that he would live as long as a certain piece of wood remained intact, the slayer of the Calydonian Boar.

ANSWER: Meleager

Result: 2881 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 56839

Question: According to some accounts, this man had a hereditary mission of hunting a creature which made the noise of thirty pairs of hounds whenever it moved. He killed the King of Orkney during the battle of Terrabil, and during a joust he shattered the Sword from the Stone. This father of Sir Lamorak met Arthur while pursuing a creature with the head of a snake, the body of a leopard, the haunches of a lion, and the hooves of a hart. FTP, name this king, sometimes said to be the father of Percival, who perpetually hunted the Questing Beast.

ANSWER: King Pellinore

Result: 2882 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 56840

Question: The coming of the Korean hero Pak Hyeokkeose was signaled by a great white horse bowing before one of these. The Chinese primordial giant Pan-Gu created the heaven and earth by pushing apart two pieces of one of these. In Russian myth, one of these inside a duck, inside a hare, inside an iron chest was said to contain the fiery soul of the sorcerer-giant Koshchei the Deathless. The goddess Ammavaru produced one from which the Trimurti were born. The Dioscuri were born from one of these resulting from the union of the wife of Tyndareus with a god in the shape of swan. The heroes Castor and Pollux were hatched from, FTP, what type of ovoid reproductive vessel?

ANSWER: (an) eggs

Result: 2883 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 56841

Question: The founding myth of these people involves four brothers and four sisters emerging from the central cave of the Tavern of Dawn. One of the brothers, known as "the salty one," is treacherously sealed in a cave, while another brother, known as "the peppery one," touches an idol and is petrified. In the stories of these people, the sun god gives the original eight siblings a golden rod which sinks into the ground, and Mama-occlo's brother-husband founds a capital on the site. FTP, name these people whose first leader, Ayar-manco, built the House of the Sun, a temple to Viracocha, in Cuzco.

ANSWER: Inca

Result: 2884 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 56842

Question: The Greek counterpart of this Roman figure was sometimes said to have made use of an item crafted by the Telchines. This cult partner of Lua ruled over a "race of men sprung from tree trunks / and sturdy oaks," according to Evander. He was frequently associated with the cult partner of Consus, and was considered to be the father of Picus and Veritas. He was believed to have ruled over a golden age in Latium after finding shelter with Janus while fleeing his son. Slaves were given freedom of speech during the great festival of, FTP, what Roman equivalent of the Greek Titan Cronus?

ANSWER: Saturnus

Result: 2885 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 56843

Question: Some of these creatures featured prominently, along with a sacred tree sprung from a Dodonian acorn, in a prayer to Zeus proffered by the father of Telamon after Hera sent a drought and an infestation of poisonous serpents to Aegina. One of these creatures was used by a guest of Cocalus, along with some honey and gossamer, to claim a reward from Minos for threading a Triton shell. Some of these creatures helped Psyche accomplish the first task set by Venus, sorting a basket of grains in one day. Zeus answered the prayer of Aeacus by transforming some of these creatures into men, whose descendants later followed Peleus and Achilles. FTP, name these industrious insects which were turned into Myrmidons.

ANSWER: ants

Result: 2886 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 56844

Question: His soul was said to reside in the bull Aa-Nefer or the ram of Mendes, and his backbone was identified with the djed pillar. He absorbed the attributes of Khentamentiu of Abydos, whose name, meaning "Foremost of the Westerners," became one of his epithets. He was usually depicted wearing the atef crown and carrying a crook and a flail. In some accounts, he turned up in the palace of Malcandre, king of Byblos, in a pillar made from a tamarisk tree which had grown around a chest with his body sealed inside. FTP, name this god of vegetation who became the lord of the underworld after being murdered by his brother Set.

ANSWER: Osiris or Ausares or Asar or Ser

Result: 2887 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 56845

Question: This woman's advice led to a son of Clud being the centerpiece of the first game of Badger-in-the-Bag. On one occasion this daughter of Hyfaidd Hen was made to wear the collars of asses for over a year. She was rescued by Teyrnon from a sentence that she spend seven years beside a mounting block, telling her story to passers-by and offering to carry them to the court of her husband. She received her sentence after six nurses smeared her face with puppy blood and claimed that she had killed her son Pryderi. FTP, name this wife of Pwyll.

ANSWER: Rhiannon

Result: 2888 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 56846

Question: This god granted Spermo the power of turning anything she touched into corn, and gave similar powers to her two sisters. He slept with Oeneus's wife Althaea, fathering Deianeira. As an infant, he struck Athamas blind, so that Athamas began flogging a she-goat, mistaking it for this god's aunt Ino. A group of pirates planned to sell him into slavery, but he frightened the pirates into leaping overboard, where they turned into dolphins. He married a princess who had been abandoned by Theseus on Naxos. FTP, name this god who was born from Zeus's thigh after the death of his mother Semele, the Greek god of wine.

ANSWER: Dionysus

Result: 2889 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 56847

Question: He modestly retreated before the Xanthian women when they presented themselves with hoisted skirts. This occurred after he asked Poseidon to flood the plain behind him while he advanced against a king of Lycia. His story is recounted in the Iliad by his grandson Glaucus when Glaucus encounters Diomedes, and his daughter Laodamia was the mother by Zeus of Sarpedon. He defeated a daughter of Echidna and Typhon, but at the end of his life he was crippled after Zeus sent a gadfly to prevent his project of flying to Olympus. FTP, name this hero who affixed to his spear a lump of lead in order to kill the Chimera.

ANSWER: Bellerophon or Bellerophontes

Result: 2890 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 56848

Question: He is often depicted wearing a tiger skin, while his companion wears a leopard skin and carries a large bag. According to one myth, he and his companion were captured after a protracted battle against 33 gods. He and his companion resemble oni, but he can be distinguished by his circular frame of large drums. He can be avoided only by hiding under mosquito netting, an important piece of information given his love for eating human navels. Typically shown with the wind god Fujin, FTP name this Japanese god of thunder and lightning.

ANSWER: Raiden or Raijin

Result: 2891 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 56849

Question: It was placed on Baldur's pyre, but his shade sent it back to Asgard with Hermod. Somehow, it ended up in Frey's possession, as Skirnir offered it as a second bribe in his attempt to win Frey the hand of Gerda, but she was unmoved. A similar item, known as Andvaranaut, was used to cover the last whisker of the slain Otter, son of Hreidmar, but was cursed by Andvari. It was created as part of a contest which also saw the creation of a glow-in-the-dark mechanical boar and a wig of living gold. FTP, name this golden treasure which produced eight copies of itself every ninth night, the ring of Odin.

ANSWER: Draupnir (prompt on The Dropper)

Result: 2892 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 56850

Question: She reared Pandareus's orphaned daughters on curds, honey, and sweet wine, but they were snatched up by the Harpies while she was distracted. This mother of Herophilus and Rhodus was caught once by Athena while surreptitiously working at a loom, after which she never did any work. Sometimes said to be the daughter of Dione, she arranged the death of Glaucus, who refused to allow his mares to breed. She was more commonly thought to have sprung from the sea-foam that gathered around the severed genitals of Uranus. FTP, name this Greek goddess of desire and love.

ANSWER: Aphrodite

Result: 2893 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 3 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 56851

Question: He asked Kothar to build him a palace, but did not want it to have any windows. He used his magical weapons "Driver" and "Chaser" to defeat a god sometimes known as "Prince Sea." Before facing a foe who threatened to eat him "in red lumps of two spans," this god copulated with a heifer "seventy-seven times, eighty-eight times." This chief god of Ugarit was resurrected seven years after his death at the hands of Mot, which was avenged by his consort Anat. FTP, name this son of El or Dagan, a Canaanite weather and fertility god whose name means "lord."

ANSWER: Baal-Hadad

Result: 2894 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 56852

Question: He returned to his own form after dying in a drunken brawl while incarnated as Pradyumna, son of Rukmini and Krishna. His red banner bearing the emblem of the monster fish Makara, the mount of Varuna, is carried by one of the Apsaras, a band of nymphs who surround him when he travels. He usually rides a parrot, and travels in the company of his wife, Rati, and his friend Vasanta, who strings his sugar-cane bow with humming-bees. He was burned up by Shiva's third eye after causing Shiva to fall in love with Parvati using one of his five flower-tipped arrows of desire. FTP, name this god of love and desire who lends his name to a famous Sutra.

ANSWER: Kama

Result: 2895 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 56853

Question: According to Theocritus, Aphrodite used a live wryneck spread-eagled to a firewheel to keep this woman's passions glowing, at the behest of Athena and Hera. Some stories record that in her later years, she lost a beauty contest to Thetis, and cured Heracles of the madness that had caused him to kill his children. She earned the enmity of the Thebans when she gave cursed wedding gifts to King Creon's daughter. After killing her half-brother Apsyrtus to stall her father's pursuit, she went to Aeaea for purification by her aunt Circe. FTP, name this daughter of Aeëtes who married Aegeus after being abandoned by Jason.

ANSWER: Medea

Result: 2896 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 56854

Question: The Voluspo contains a catalogue of these "forebears of Lofar," some of whom "sought a home in the fields of sand," while others made their home in a golden hall in Nidavellir. Four of them were placed at the cardinal points and charged with holding up the vault of the sky. In the Poetic Eddas, they are said to have risen "out of Brimir's blood and the legs of Blain," while Snorri states that they grew from maggots crawling in Ymir's corpse. Two of them, Fjalar and Galar, created the mead of poetry, and Freya slept with four of them to obtain Brisingamen. Sometimes identified with the dark elves, FTP name this race of master smiths in Norse myth.

ANSWER: dwarves or dvergar

Result: 2897 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 56855

Question: On one occasion, this character's grandfather cast a spell on him, causing him to fight the waves until he collapsed. In some stories, he is conceived when his mother swallows a may-fly during the feast celebrating her marriage to Sualdam. His talents included the apple feat and the feat of the salmon-leap, which he used to win three wishes on the Isle of Skye from "the shadowy one," the warrior-woman Scáthach. He used the Gae Bolga to kill Ferdiad and his son Conlai, whom he begot on Aife before marrying Emer. FTP, name this Irish hero, born Setanta.

ANSWER: Cuchulainn (accept Setanta before the end)

Result: 2898 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 56856

Question: A king of Elis tried to imitate this character by dragging hide-bound brazen cauldrons behind his chariot and hurling oaken torches in the air. One of this character's sons offered him a sacrifice as "the Averter of Flies" at the founding of the Olympic Games. He once had all his sinews ripped out, placed in a bag, and put under the guardianship of the monstrous Delphyne. As an infant, he was placed in a cradle and the sounds of his wailing were drowned out by the spear-clashing Curetes, so that his father would not devour him. FTP, name this father of Perseus and Heracles, the leader of the Greek gods.

ANSWER: Zeus

Result: 2899 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56857

Question: This god gave a man a golden seal and poniard with which the man was able to make the earth grow. Later, he instructed that man, known as Jamshid or Yima, to construct a vara. He created the primeval man Gayomart, only to see Gayomart poisoned at the prompting of the prostitute Jeh. In one hymn, he offers up a sacrifice to his servant Tishtrya, the Yazad of Sirius. His son Atar battled the dragon Azhi Dahaka, and his retinue, the Amesha Spentas, opposed the Daevas. FTP, name god who opposed Ahriman, the supreme god of Zoroastrianism.

ANSWER: Ahura Mazda (prompt on Spenta Mainyu)

Result: 2900 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 56858

Question: One of this woman's brothers, who committed suicide after being driven mad by Artemis, or because everyone hated his ugliness, was named Broteas. Her husband, like Orpheus, was said to be able to move stones with his music, a talent he used in building part of Thebes. Another of her brothers first found out, while baring his breast in mourning for her, about his replacement shoulder. She disparaged Leto for having a mannish daughter and a womanish son, dooming her own children. FTP, name this wife of Amphion and daughter of Tantalus who lost 12 of her 14 children to the arrows of Apollo and Artemis.

ANSWER: Niobe

Result: 2901 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 56859

Question: He killed his first man when he fired an arrow through the head of Remulus. In one account, he startles his father when he notes with a laugh that he and his companions are eating the thin wheat cakes they use in place of tables, fulfilling the terms of a prophetic curse pronounced by the Harpy Celaeno. Virgil has Venus send Cupid in the guise of this character, the eventual founder of Alba Longa, to sit on Dido's lap. He was separated from his mother during the sack of Troy, but hung onto his father's hand. FTP, name this son of Creusa and Aeneas.

ANSWER: Ascanius or Iülus

Result: 2902 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 56860

Question: Her trickery resulted in Anty or Nemty the Ferryman losing his toes as punishment for bringing her to Central Island. She turned herself into a headless flint statue after her son beheaded her for harpooning his rival in the form of a hippo, then letting that rival go when he appealed for mercy as her brother. She hid her young son in the marshes of Chemmish in the Delta region to protect him from her brother, who had killed her husband. She faithfully reassembled the scattered pieces of her husband's dismembered body. FTP, name this wife of Osiris.

ANSWER: Isis

Result: 2903 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 56861

Question: This creature lived by a lake near Amymone where murderers came to be purified, close to the spot where Dionysus descended to fetch Semele from Tartarus. The hot springs at Thermopylae were formed during an incident which saw this creature avenged on its killer with the help of an item delivered by Lichas. That item, a gift from a centaur, was a shirt infused with blood from the centaur and this creature. This creature received aid in its final battle from a giant crab, but its opponent was aided by his nephew, who used a torch to keep this creature from growing new heads. FTP, name this many-headed monster slain by Heracles in Lerna.

ANSWER: Lernaean Hydra

Result: 2904 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 56862

Question: He married Gayatri when his first wife was too slow to arrive at a sacrifice he was performing. With the help of his first wife, he tricked Kumbhakarna into requesting eternal sleep. He gave birth from his thumb to the sage Daksha, who became chief of the Prajapatis. In early myths he produces a female partner later identified with Sarasvati and, when she modestly tries to move away from his intense gaze, grows four extra heads to keep her in his sight. FTP, name this creator-god who later lost one head to Shiva, his fellow, with Vishnu, in the Trimurti.

ANSWER: Brahma

Result: 2905 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 56863

Question: While disguised as a poet, this character conjures illusions of twelve horses, twelve dogs, and twelve golden shields, which he trades for the pigs of Pryderi. He later kills Pryderi in single combat. He sets up the conflict with Pryderi to help his brother accomplish a rape, but he and his brother are caught and punished by being forced to spend three years as beasts, mating with each other. He tricks his sister into giving her son a name and arms later on in the fourth branch of the Mabinogi. FTP name this son of Beli and Don, the brother of Gilfaethwy and protective uncle of Lleu Llaw Gyffes.

ANSWER: Gwydion

Result: 2906 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 56864

Question: He died of a broken heart after incorrectly guessing the number, gender and birthdate of the baby pigs in a pregnant sow. This brother of Leucippe and Theonoë was taught his art by his father Thestor. His advice led to the capture of Helenus and an expedition to Lemnos to fetch the bow and arrows of Heracles. This renegade Trojan, a priest of Apollo, told Agamemnon to sacrifice his most beautiful daughter to Artemis. FTP, name this prophet for the Greek army during the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Calchas

Result: 2907 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 56865

Question: In the Svipdagsmol, this deity is credited with creating "the wounding wand" Laevateinn. In another story, he is credited with inventing the fishing net while living in a house with four doors so that he could look out for his pursuers, who caught him in the waterfall of Fránang in the form of a salmon. His son Vali was then turned into a wolf and set loose on his other son Narvi, and Narvi's entrails were used to bind him. Vali and Narvi were his sons by his wife Sigyn, but he also had three children by Angrboda. FTP, name this god who gave birth to Sleipnir, Jormungandr and Fenrir.

ANSWER: Loki

Result: 2908 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 56866

Question: In a Tsimshian myth, this character begins to eat after being affected by the power of two slaves called Mouth at Both Ends. Later, he hides in the drinking bucket of the daughter of a chief in heaven and is reborn from her, achieving a version of the earth-diver myth. In a Chukchee myth, this character's mighty droppings form the earth. FTP, name this popular trickster figure of the Pacific Northwest credited with forming sheep out of mud and woman out of clay, then blowing life into them by flapping his wings.

ANSWER: Raven

Result: 2909 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 56867

Question: In Polynesian mythology, it was produced in the armpits of Uira. In Roman mythology, it was personified by Fulgora. In Aztec mythology, people killed by it, along with those who died of certain diseases or drowning, were brought to Tlalocan by the psychopomp Xolotl, who was also regarded as the god of this phenomenon. In Greek mythology, it was the cause of death for Capaneus, as well as the meaning of the name of the Cyclops Steropes. In Norse mythology, it was sometimes associated with Odin's spear Gungnir, but it was more often associated with another weapon. FTP, name this violent natural phenomenon thought to follow the path of Mjolnir, Thor's hammer.

ANSWER: lightning

Result: 2910 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 56868

Question: This woman, whose name means "White Phantom," was sometimes said to have had a half-sister who was her double, known as "The False." In one story, the ruler of the Summer Land abducts her, but later agrees to return her. In later versions of the story, her abductor Melwas becomes the knight Meliagraunce. Two of Gawain's brothers were killed during her rescue from being burned at the stake for adultery. The Round Table was the dowry of, FTP, what woman, the wife of Arthur?

ANSWER: Guinevere

Result: 2911 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 56869

Question: Some say that this man, rather than Thamyris or Minos, was the first pederast, as he fell in love with and abducted Pelops's bastard son Chrysippus. This happened after he was banished from the city he had ruled by Zethus and Amphion. He died while traveling to ask the Delphic Oracle how he might get rid of a monster which had consumed his wife's nephew Haimon. His son was raised by Periboea and Polybus in Corinth after this man pierced the feet of his son with a nail and left his son to die. FTP name this paternal grandfather of Ismene and Antigone, the first husband of Jocasta and father of Oedipus.

ANSWER: Laius

Result: 2912 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 56870

Question: In one story, he goes to the underworld to retrieve his friend's pukku and mukku, but breaks every taboo and is forced to stay there. He meets a woman whose name means "the Voluptuous," and they make love for six days and seven nights, after which this being fashioned by the goddess Aruru is avoided by his former companions, the wild animals. His violent acts include throwing the thigh of the Bull of Heaven at Ishtar and decapitating the demon Humbaba. FTP, name this hairy wild man who becomes the companion of Gilgamesh.

ANSWER: Enkidu

Result: 2913 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 56871

Question: The Cabeiri, who save sailors from shipwreck, were her servants. She became the lover of a young man who was given to her in a chest for safe-keeping after being born from a myrrh tree split in two by a sword. Peirithous tried to take her for his bride, but ended up stuck to a chair. She was forced into marriage on the strength of evidence given by a gardener named Ascalaphus. Dionysus bribed her with a gift of myrtle to release the spirit of Semele. FTP, name this part-time lover of Adonis who was condemned to spend part of each year as Queen of the Underworld after eating seven pomegranate seeds.

ANSWER: Persephone or Core or Persephatta

Result: 2914 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 4 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 56872

Question: The giant Hrungnir drunkenly boasts that he will pick it up and carry it off to Jotunheim. This place is home to the hart Eikthyrnir, who eats the branches of the tree Laerad. This place is also home to the cauldron Eldhrimnir, in which the boar Saehrimnir is boiled each day, and to a goat which supplies a cauldron's worth of mead every day. That goat, Heidrun, is sometimes said to live on its roof of golden shields. Every day, its inhabitants, the einherjar, go out to fight each other. FTP, name this "hall of the slain" where Odin welcomes the souls of brave warriors.

ANSWER: Valhalla

Result: 2915 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 56873

Question: This man's father was the son of Tyro and Tyro's uncle Cretheus. His uncle, a son of Poseidon, claimed to be haunted by the ghost of a son of Nephele who had fled Orchomenus on a magical steed. This man fulfilled a prophecy warning his uncle against a one-sandalled man. He lost a sandal when he courteously carried an old crone, actually Hera in disguise, across a river. He killed his uncle after retrieving an item associated with Phrixus in a quest set by his uncle Pelias. FTP, name this man who assembled and led the Argonauts.

ANSWER: Jason

Result: 2916 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 56874

Question: In one version of her genesis, her father produced her from a white-copper mirror held in his left hand. One of her grandsons was sent to earth after she gave him a sword, a brass mirror known as the Eight-Handed Mirror, and a magatama necklace. The necklace and mirror had been placed on the sacred Sakaki tree as part of a plan to restore light to the world by luring this goddess out of a cave. She was lured out when she heard the gods laughing at the erotic dance of Uzume, the kami of joy. The emperors of Japan claimed descent from, FTP, what Shinto sun goddess?

ANSWER: Amaterasu or Omikami

Result: 2917 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 56875

Question: She drove an Edonian king mad for opposing one of her grandsons, whom she purified of murders, after that grandson conquered India. She helped doom her husband by providing mustard and salt to add to his honeyed drink. According to some accounts, she switched one of her sons at infancy with a foal; that son later claimed to have created the horse. Another of her sons was raised by two daughters of Melisseus in a cave on Mount Dicte, and fed on the milk of the goat Amaltheia. That son was switched at birth with a stone, saving him from being eaten by this Titaness's husband. FTP, name this wife of Cronus.

ANSWER: Rhea

Result: 2918 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 56876

Question: When this goddess offers Loki a crystal cup of mead, he accuses her of infidelity in the Lokasenna, and similar allegations are made to her husband in the Harbarthsljoth. One of her children, who lived in the hall Ydalir, invented snow-shoes and was renowned for his prowess at archery and skiing. She was the recipient of a gift made by the sons of Ivaldi, who also made the boat Skidbladnir and the spear Gungnir. She was the mother of Ull and Thrud, and the step-mother of Magni. FTP, name this goddess whose hair was replaced by living gold, the wife of Thor.

ANSWER: Sif

Result: 2919 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 56877

Question: In the Annals of the Cakchiquels, it is kneaded with the blood of the tapir and the serpent to create humanity. The Peruvian goddess Zaramama and the Aztec deities Chicomecoatl and Centeotl were associated with this plant, and the self-flaying of Xipe Totec was meant to evoke the development of its seed. Quetzalcoatl assumed the form of a black ant to retrieve some grains of it for the rest of the gods. In the Popol Vuh, the present human race is made from water mixed with ground kernels from white and yellow ears of, FTP, what plant?

ANSWER: corn or maize

Result: 2920 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 56878

Question: This character was killed by a slung piece of cheese while obeying a geis to bathe every morning in a certain spring. Fergus mac Roich was killed by Lugaid while swimming in Findloch with this ruler of Cruachain Connacht. She bribed many warriors with the promise of marriage to her daughter Findabair, and occasionally sweetened the deal with the offer of her own friendly thighs. She sent three witches and three wizards to kill Cuchulainn, but they failed. FTP, name this queen and wife of Ailill who led the Cattle Raid of Cooley against the Ulstermen. Ans: Medb or Maeve

ANSWER: Medb or Maeve

Result: 2921 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 56879

Question: He loses many men to the people of King Lamus after three scouts follow a daughter of the chieftain Antiphates into an ambush. Earlier, he had buried a sackful of gold as part of a successful plot to frame Nauplius's son, participated in the murder of Dolon, coached Sinon on lying, and purified Achilles of the murder of his enemy Thersites. He recounts his adventures, including his encounter with the Laestrygonians, in the court of King Alcinous after being rescued by Nausicaa. FTP, name this hero who travels for ten years in a Homeric epic before reaching Ithaca.

ANSWER: Odysseus

Result: 2922 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 56880

Question: In answer to a challenge, he built a ship of cedar plastered with gypsum, tricking his challenger into trying to make a boat of stone, which sank. His eyes were once plucked out and buried, growing into lotuses, but his sight was restored when gazelle milk was rubbed into his eyesockets by Hathor. A misunderstanding over his portrayal in his child aspect led the Greeks to consider him the god of silence, Harpokrates. In some accounts, he was conceived when his mother hovered in the form of a kite over the corpse of his father. FTP name this celestial falcon-god, the son of Isis and Osiris.

ANSWER: Horus or Heru of Hor

Result: 2923 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 56881

Question: Her brother Phoroneus was the first to discover the use of fire after Prometheus stole it. According to some sources, she wound up in Egypt, where she founded the worship of Isis. Her son, who was then identified with the Apis bull, was the father of Libya. After marrying a man named Telegonus, this daughter of the River-god Inachus gave birth to Epaphus. She visited the chained Prometheus, who foretold her travels, which led to the naming of the Bosporus. The jealous Hera had her tethered and guarded by the hundred-eyed Argus. FTP, name this lover of Zeus who was turned into a white cow.

ANSWER: Io

Result: 2924 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 56882

Question: The Welsh equivalent of this character was a warrior chief who conducted a raid on Kelliwic during which he struck or seduced a queen. He was sometimes said to be the product of an unknowingly incestuous union between a queen who later took Lamorak as her lover, and that queen's brother. He joined one of that queen's sons in exposing a scandal. This son of Morgause died in battle after the sight of a snake prompted a knight to draw a sword. FTP, name this treacherous knight who died at Camlann after fatally wounding Arthur.

ANSWER: Mordred or Modred (prompt on Medraut)

Result: 2925 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 56883

Question: One of these creatures named Aswathaman was killed by Bhima in the Mahabharata so that Yudisthira could mislead Drona without lying. Maya dreamed of a small white one entering her womb prior to the birth of Siddhartha. A large white one, said to be ever-victorious, was produced by the churning of the ocean, and could generally be found at the entrance to Svarga. The god most often associated with this animal, a son of Parvati, had his original head burned or cut off by Shiva. Indra's mount Airavata was, FTP, what sort of animal which also furnished the replacement head for Ganesh?

ANSWER: elephants

Result: 2926 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 56884

Question: Erechthonius was born as a result of this character's failed attempt to outrage Athena. In the Iliad, he helps Achilles against the River-god Scamander. His apprentice Cedalion was kidnapped and used as a guide by the blind Orion, and he helped Oenopion hide from Orion by building an underground chamber for Oenopion. He was also credited with creating Talos, and with making a magical net which he used to catch his wife in bed with her lover Ares. FTP, name this lame husband of Aphrodite, the Greek god of smithying.

ANSWER: Hephaestus

Result: 2927 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 56885

Question: He once cured a fellow god of castration by spitting on the wound. He was the father of Nefer Hor and Hornub by his wives Nehmauit and Seshat, respectively. In one myth, he plays draughts with the Moon, winning a seventy-second part of the Moon's light, with which he makes 5 intercalated days, allowing Nut to give birth to her children. In another story, he exorcises the poison of a scorpion sent by Set to sting the child Horus after helping Isis reassemble the body of Osiris. Known to the Greeks as Hermes Trismegistus, FTP, name this inventor of the arts and sciences who was often depicted with the head of an ibis.

ANSWER: Thoth or Djehuti or Zehuti

Result: 2928 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 56886

Question: She was the mother of the Empusae, a group of demons who had the haunches of asses and wore brazen slippers. She was also sometimes said to be the mother of Scylla. In the Aeneid, this figure is said to have placed the Sibyl in charge of the groves of Avernus. This goddess of roads in general and crossroads in particular once heard someone cry, "A rape! A rape!" but was too slow to see a chariot driving into the ground with Hades and Persephone. Sometimes identified with Selene and Artemis, FTP name this goddess whose priestesses included Medea.

ANSWER: Hecate

Result: 2929 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 56887

Question: This creature is the source of the river Vam. He is fated to be killed by an opponent wielding a weapon made from the strips of leather men pare off at the toes and heels of their boots. This creature's death will come after he leaves his current abode in the lake Amsvartnir, on the isle of Lyngvi, where he sits gagged by a sword. At Ragnarok, he will die when the second strongest of the Aesir grabs his gaping jaws and wrenches them apart. Before that he will escape the bond Gleipnir. FTP, name this creature which will be killed by Vidarr after killing Odin, a monstrous wolf.

ANSWER: Fenrir or Fenris wolf

Result: 2930 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 56888

Question: This deity's name is cognate with that of the Old Norse figure Tjarnaglofi. During the creation of the world, he hid some dirt in his mouth, but was forced to spit it out when the land began growing. On another occasion, he cursed his brother's descendants to eat the excrement of the bee. He fought his brother twice annually, winning once to gain control of the waning half of the year. First appearing as the shadow of his brother, FTP name this Slavic god associated with Koshchei, known as the "black god" and paired with his brother Bielobog.

ANSWER: Czernobog

Result: 2931 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 56889

Question: His brothers included Cilix, who gave his name to Cilicia, and Phineus, who was tormented by Harpies. He was sentenced to serve eight years as the bondsman of Ares for killing a sacred serpent. The Delphic Oracle advised him to follow a cow and build a city wherever it sank down from weariness. This father of Semele was helped in founding that city by 5 men who sprang up when he sowed the ground with the teeth of Ares's serpent. FTP name this man who founded Thebes after abandoning the search for his sister Europa.

ANSWER: Cadmus

Result: 2932 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 56890

Question: According to one myth, he was killed by the vagina of the queen of the underworld while attempting to gain immortality by crawling into her body to crush her heart. In another myth, after deciding that the days were too short, he used a lasso made of his sister's hair, or flax, to catch the sun, then proceeded to beat it or break one of its legs to force it to go slower. Perhaps his greatest feat involved the use of an ancestor's jawbone and some blood from his own nose as bait, and the paddling expertise of his brothers. FTP, name this Polynesian god credited with hooking and drawing up New Zealand's North Island and the Hawaiian Islands.

ANSWER: Maui Potiki or Tikitiki

Result: 2933 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 56891

Question: Frey's servant Skirnir offered Gerda eleven of these in an attempt to bribe her to marry Frey, but she refused. A young man who prayed for help in winning the hand of the daughter of Iasus or Schoeneus was given three of these by Aphrodite. The wife of Bragi was known for her supply of these, while a certain companion of Ares was known for owning one inscribed "Kallisti." Ladon was set as a guard over, and Melanion or Hippomenes beat Atalanta in a footrace with the help of, FTP, what sort of magical fruit kept by Idunn in Norse myth, and by the Hesperides in Greek myth?

ANSWER: golden apples

Result: 2934 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 5 | Question: 21 | Mythology | NoneID: 56892

Question: In the Aeneid, the Etruscan Arruns is killed by this goddess's follower Opis in punishment for killing her favorite, a leader of the Volscians said to be capable of running over the fields of grain without bruising the crops. The minor god Virbius, identified with the resurrected Greek Hippolytus, was associated with this goddess. Her priest at Aricia, whose title was rex nemorensis, was a fugitive slave; as King of the Grove, he had to kill his predecessor in single combat initiated by plucking a bough. FTP, name this Roman goddess who favored the chaste warrior maiden Camilla, identified with the Greek Artemis.

ANSWER: Diana

Result: 2935 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 57170

Question: This man employed a servant named Mnemon whose sole task was to remind him not to kill any of Apollo's sons, due to a prophecy made by this man's mother. His mother foiled a conspiracy by alerting Briareus, who undid the hundred knots binding Zeus. Zeus and Poseidon both lusted for his mother, but refrained from bedding her due to a prophecy that she would bear a son greater than the father. His mother held him in a fire to burn his mortality or dipped him in the Styx, making him invulnerable except at the heel. FTP, name this son of Thetis, the greatest of the Greek warriors at Troy.

ANSWER: Achilles

Result: 2936 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57171

Question: In Irish myth, the sorceress Tlachtga created one of these for Trian, and the Gaulish god Taranis was often portrayed with one. The eight-armed Japanese goddess Benten or Benzaiten was typically depicted holding a bow, an arrow, a jewel, a sword, a key, and one of these items. Tyche and Nemesis shared the rudder of destiny and one of these items as attributes. The Egyptian god Khnum shaped humans on one designed for pottery. Ixion was forced to roll through the sky after being bound to, FTP, what sort of item, one of which once presented an obstacle to Garuda with its sharp spokes?

ANSWER: wheel

Result: 2937 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57172

Question: He once appeared to a group of cowherds as the spirit of the mountain Govardhana, then lifted the mountain with one finger to protect the cowherds from a week-long storm sent by Indra. His second wife was the daughter of the bear king Jambuvan, whom he killed. He used his magic quoit weapon, Sudarsana, to kill his cousin Sisupala, the original betrothed of his first wife, Rukmini. His purpose was to defeat the demon Kansa, and he was born to Devaki after a certain god placed a black hair in her womb. FTP, name this brother of Balarama famous for frolicking with the gopis, the eighth incarnation of Vishnu.

ANSWER: Krishna

Result: 2938 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 57173

Question: According to Pausanias and Plutarch, this character, or another with the same name, had an oracle at Laconian Thalamae. One of her sons had to be revived after drowning in a jar of honey, and another son, Androgeus, was killed as a result of an Athenian plot. One of her daughters was abandoned by a man who later married her other daughter Phaedra. She freed Icarus and Daedalus in gratitude for Daedalus's help in facilitating her dalliance with a sacrificial victim intended for Poseidon who had became the object of this woman's unnatural lust. FTP, name this mother of Ariadne and wife of Minos whose union with a bull produced the Minotaur.

ANSWER: Pasiphaë

Result: 2939 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57174

Question: As a young lad, this character finds employment in the home of the nobleman Tegid Foel, whose son went unharmed at the battle of Camlann due to his great ugliness. Later, he foils a plot by the lecherous prince Rhun to despoil the daughter-in-law of Gwyddno Garanhir after being retrieved from a weir by Gwyddno's son Elphin. At a crucial moment, he pushes Tegid Foel's son Morfran or Afagddu aside and imbibes three drops of a potion of wisdom. FTP, name this Welsh magician and bard who was reborn after being swallowed in the form of a grain of wheat by the witch Ceridwen.

ANSWER: Taliesin or Gwion Bach

Result: 2940 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 57175

Question: In Ovid's Fasti, her sister is identified with the goddess of the New Year. She won a large plot of land known as Byrsa from the King of Gaetulia, Iarbas, by cutting up an oxhide and laying the strips around the boundary. Her first husband Sychaeus was murdered by her brother Pygmalion, prompting her and her sister Anna to flee Tyre. She deals kindly with some Trojan survivors of a storm before meeting and falling love with their leader. FTP, name this queen and founder of Carthage who committed suicide after being abandoned by Aeneas.

ANSWER: Dido or Elissa

Result: 2941 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57176

Question: In one section of the Poetic Edda, this god journeys to his father's home "east of Elivagar," where he meets his loathsome nine-hundred headed grandmother. His goal on that journey is to take a kettle "a mile in depth" that belongs to his father, the giant Hymir. Later considered a son of Odin, he will slay and be slain at Ragnarok by a monster that had previously been bound at Gnipahellir, the Hel-hound Garm. However, his worst run-in with a canine resulted in the wrist being known as the wolf-joint. FTP, name this courageous god who lost his right hand to wolf Fenrir.

ANSWER: Tyr or Tiwaz or Ziu

Result: 2942 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57177

Question: . He was banished to Cephallenia when an oracle announced that his father would be killed by him or one of his brothers. His father once feigned madness, plowing with an ass and an ox yoked together and flinging salt over his shoulder, but Palamedes uncovered the charade by placing this character in front of his father's team. Following his father's death at the hands of his half-brother Telegonus, this man married Telegonus's mother Circe, who had tried and failed years earlier to turn his father into a pig. FTP, name this man who grew up on Ithaca during his father's 20 year absence, a son of Odysseus.

ANSWER: Telemachus

Result: 2943 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 57178

Question: The temple of this goddess in her cult center at Dendera had columns in the shape of sistra. She was often portrayed with the Menait, an emblem of joy and pleasure, on her back. When Ra went off to sulk after the deity Baba insulted him, this goddess managed to cheer Ra up by going to his house and showing him her private parts. She was worshipped at Dendera as the wife of Horus of Edfu, and their son Ihy was sometimes known as the "bull of confusion." Her name means "House of Horus," and she was thought to nourish the living with her milk. FTP, name this goddess of love, often portrayed with a cow's head.

ANSWER: Hathor or Athyr or Athor

Result: 2944 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57179

Question: He killed his cousin Halirrhothius, supposedly to defend his daughter Alcippe. Like Apollo and Poseidon, he had a son named Cycnus. This father-in-law of Procne was one of the two Olympians not invited to the wedding of Deidameia or Hippodameia and Peirithous. His sacred creatures included a group of monsters known for killing men and beasts with showers of brazen feathers. The Golden Fleece was kept on Colchis in a grove dedicated to this god, who once assumed the form of a wild boar and gored Adonis to death. FTP, name this father of Penthesilea, Phobus and Deimos, the Greek god of war.

ANSWER: Ares

Result: 2945 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 57180

Question: One divine patron of this profession was grouped with Luchta and Credne in na Trí Dee Dánann, and possessed the ale of immortality. Finn macCool and the Fiana encountered a gigantic one-footed warrior with three arms who practiced this trade. In Welsh myth, Arianrhod's son Dylan was killed by the divine patron of this craft, the god Govannon, who corresponds to the Irish Goibhniu. FTP, give the profession of Culainn, whose hound was killed by Cuchulainn, and the god Goibhniu, who worked during the Second Battle of Mag Tuired mending shattered spears and swords.

ANSWER: blacksmiths

Result: 2946 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57181

Question: In the Hymn of Agushaya, the antics of this goddess annoy a god who proceeds to use the dust under his fingernails to create an exaggerated mirror image of her, named Saltu. She broke the wing of the bird-man Allulu, and turned her father's gardener Ishullanu into a frog. The recital of the stories of these and other unfortunate lovers by a two-thirds immortal hero who rejected her advances caused her to go to her father Anu and demand punishment for that hero, Gilgamesh. FTP, name this Babylonian goddess of love and war whose other lovers included Tammuz.

ANSWER: Ishtar

Result: 2947 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57182

Question: In later times, he was considered the son of Angiras, and thus inherited the title of king of the Pitris, formerly a role of Varuna. In the Vedas, he forms an early triad with his brothers Indra and Surya. Bhrigu once cursed him for being a tattle-tale, but later granted a dispensation whereby he remained pure regardless of what he ate. In the Ramayana, he appears and proclaims the innocence of Sita when she casts herself on a pyre. He had a notorious appetite for sacrificial offerings, especially clarified butter, which he licked up with his seven tongues. FTP, name this god of fire.

ANSWER: Agni

Result: 2948 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57183

Question: His wife Cleola died after giving birth to the weak Pleisthenes. He gained his throne when the sun went backward on a dial by Zeus's decree. This king of Mycenae promised to sacrifice the finest of his flock to Artemis, but could not bring himself to part with the fleece of a golden lamb sent by Pan at the instigation of Hermes. His brother stole the fleece while engaging in adultery with his wife Aerope. In retaliation, he murdered three of his nephews and served chunks of their flesh to his brother. FTP, name this father of Menelaus and Agamemnon, the brother of Thyestes.

ANSWER: Atreus

Result: 2949 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 57184

Question: These people believed in feminine nature spirits known as etugen. They also believed that humans were the descendants of a fallow deer who mated with a blue-gray wolf. Their greatest leader, possibly in an attempt to identify himself with the hero Bukhe Beligte, claimed to be the son of the sky spirit Hormast Tengri. According to legend, they were repelled by a shower of lightning arrows shot by Raiden, or by the storm god Kami-kaze when they sent an invading fleet to Japan. FTP, name these people whose epic of Geser follows the exploits of the titular khan.

ANSWER: Mongols

Result: 2950 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 57185

Question: This character gave Pandareus the gift of never suffering from the belly-ache, and cursed Erysichthon to perpetual hunger. During the wedding of Cadmus and Harmonia, she became pregnant with Plutus by having sex with Iasius in a thrice-plowed field. During her stay with Celeus and Metaneira, she tried but failed to burn away Demophoön's mortality. Before leaving Eleusis, she gave a chariot drawn by serpents, seed-corn, and a wooden plow to Triptolemus and told him to teach mankind the art of agriculture. FTP, name this sister of Hera and mother of Persephone.

ANSWER: Demeter

Result: 2951 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 57186

Question: This god's lieutenant, known as He Who Hastens, was Paynal. He was conceived while his mother was sweeping a temple as penance, and her husbandless pregnancy offended this god's sister. His sister plotted with the Four Hundred Southerners to kill his mother, but the traitor Cuahuitlicac informed this god. At the moment of the attack, he sprang fully armed from his mother Coatlicue, who had been impregnated by a ball of feathers. He told his people to build a city where they saw an eagle killing a snake on a cactus. Known as Hummingbird on the Left, FTP name this war and sun god, the patron of the Aztecs.

ANSWER: Huitzilopochtli

Result: 2952 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 57187

Question: This man served as champion in opposing King Anguish's demand of a tribute of slaves, killing Anguish's step-brother Morholt. Like the Greek Aegeus, he died of despair after arranging for a signal of white or black sails; unlike Aegeus, he asked for white sails if his ships were returning with his true love, who had the power to cure him. In one story, he fights Lancelot for four hours after mistaking Lancelot for his enemy Palamedes. FTP, name this prince of Lyonesse who, according to some accounts, was treacherously killed by his jealous uncle, King Mark.

ANSWER: Tristan or Sir Tristram of Lyonesse

Result: 2953 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 57188

Question: The gods took away Mundilferi's children because he had the audacity to name them for this pair. In the Alvissmol, Alvis claims that the dwarves call one of this pair "The Deceiver of Dvalin," and proceeds to succumb to its power. A disguised rime-giant demanded them, in addition to the hand of Freya in marriage, as a reward for rebuilding the walls of Asgard. At Ragnarok, they are slated to be consumed by the wolves Hati and Skoll. FTP, name these celestial bodies known in Norse mythology as Mani and Sol.

ANSWER: the sun and the moon (accept Sol and Mani before the end; order does not matter)

Result: 2954 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 6 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57189

Question: The god Serapis was often pictured with this creature at his feet. According to some accounts, the plant aconite was created from the slaver of this creature dripping on a field. The mother of Voluptas was advised by a tower on dealing with this creature, and in the Aeneid, when the Sibyl sees the snakes sprouting from this creature's neck she tosses it a drugged sop. Eurystheus quailed in fear before this son of Typhon and Echidna, who was captured by Heracles without the help of weapons, as stipulated by Hades. FTP, name this guardian of the far bank of the river Styx, a three-headed hound.

ANSWER: Cerberus

Result: 2955 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 57190

Question: The protagonist of this epic is described as having four ears and four eyes, and fire blazes forth when he moves his lips. In the first attack, a belligerent vizier is captured by the nose-rope after his father is slain while under the influence of a sleeping spell. That vizier counsels war when his parents complain of a recent spate of unseemly hilarity in the Abode of Heaven. The mother of Mummu is killed by one of her descendants, who uses the Evil Wind to keep her lips open while he shoots an arrow down her throat. Beginning, "When on high," and including the story of the death Tiamat, FTP name this Babylonian epic.

ANSWER: Enuma Elish (accept When on high until it is mentioned in the question)

Result: 2956 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57191

Question: In one story, this figure or one of his priests interpret a king's dream of seven fat and seven thin cattle, and discovers the origins of the Nile. In later times, his mother was thought to be the beautiful singer, Kheredankhw, and he was said to have defeated the Asiatics with the help of his divine stepmother, Sekhmet. He was credited with writing the Book of Temple Foundations, and was typically portrayed as a seated priest with a shaved head, reading a scroll. Identified with the Greek Asclepius and considered a son of Ptah, FTP, name this deified sage and architect who built Djoser's step pyramid.

ANSWER: Imhotep or Imouthes

Result: 2957 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57192

Question: According to some accounts, this man founded his city, initially known as Ephyra, and peopled it with men sprung from mushrooms; other sources state that he came to power following the death of Glauce when Medea bequeathed the throne to him. This grandfather of Bellerophon told the River-god Asopus where to find Zeus dallying with Aegina, then twice managed to evade punishment: once by telling his wife Merope to leave him unburied, and once by tricking Hades into handcuffing himself. FTP, name this clever King of Corinth who was punished in the afterlife by being made to roll a huge boulder up a hill.

ANSWER: Sisyphus

Result: 2958 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 57193

Question: This deity appears in the Táin riding in a chariot harnessed to a one-legged chestnut horse, accompanied by a giant driving a heifer. This daughter of Ernmas vowed to destroy Indech, taking the kidneys of his valor and the blood of his heart. She made that promise while foretelling the events of the second battle of Mag Tuired after mating over a river at Samain with the Dagda. One of her two sisters cursed the Ulstermen with the pangs of Ulster. FTP, name this war-goddess identified with Badb and Macha who took the form of a hooded crow and perched on the shoulder of Cuchulainn after his death.

ANSWER: the Morrígan

Result: 2959 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57194

Question: In one tale, he fashions a robe using one feather from each bird, then hides in the robe to spy on Wulbari. He introduces blindness when he fulfills Wulbari's enigmatic request for something by bringing back the moon, the sun, and darkness. He captures a fairy with the help of some mashed yams and an Akua doll covered in sticky resin, but later falls victim to a similar trap. He loses his wealth when he buys a worthless cloak of vines and flies from Chameleon. His other major defeat comes when his eight legs become stuck to the wax girl. FTP, name this son of the sky-god Nyame, a popular African trickster figure.

ANSWER: Kwaku Anansi

Result: 2960 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 57195

Question: He spent part of his childhood in the court of Strophius, where he became close friends with Strophius's son. This brother of Chrysothemis, or else a Phocian named Machaereus, was credited with killing Neoptolemus. This companion of Pylades eventually married his own cousin Hermione. He was the subject of two dreams in which his mother dreamed that she gave birth to and suckled a serpent which drew blood from her breast. These dreams were born out when he avenged the murder of his father with the help of his sister Electra. FTP, name this son of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra.

ANSWER: Orestes

Result: 2961 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57196

Question: The horse Hoof-flourisher carries this goddess's errand girl Gná. Another of her attendants, who carries her little box and looks after her shoes, is the virgin Fulla. In the Lokasenna, Loki accuses her of lying with both of her husband's brothers, implying that she slept with all three of the children of Bestla and Bor. After one of her sons has a bad dream, she overlooks a little bush while asking ailments, birds, trees, and pretty much everything else not to harm him. FTP, name this goddess who enjoyed sitting in the hall Fensalir and spinning clouds on her loom, the protective mother of Baldur and wife of Odin.

ANSWER: Frigg

Result: 2962 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57197

Question: This man's beard was promised pride of place on a giant's cloak woven of beards of defeated chieftains; sadly, his beard had to forgo this signal honor when he defeated the giant Ritho. His pride led to one of the three unfortunate disinterments, when he dug up the head of Bran. He appears in "The Dream of Rhonabwy," playing a boardgame with Owain, and in "The Tale of Culhwch and Olwen," helping his cousin Culhwch. His prized possessions included the spear Ron and a scabbard which protected its wearer from harm. FTP, name this king who fought at Mount Badon and Camlann, the leader of the Knights of the Round Table.

ANSWER: King Arthur

Result: 2963 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 57198

Question: His herdsman Menoetes, or Menoetius, the son of Ceuthonymus, lost a wrestling match to Heracles. He was interrupted before he could seduce the nymph Minthe, whom he dazzled with his chariot and horses. According to some accounts, his brother fathered Zagreus on this character's eventual wife. During the Titanomachy, he snuck by Cronus to steal Cronus's weapons. His palace lies on the far side of the Asphodel Fields, where only Orion still has the heart to hunt the ghostly deer. FTP, name this god who owns all the gems and precious metals hidden underground, the Greek god of the dead.

ANSWER: Hades

Result: 2964 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57199

Question: He died suddenly when he paused to drink at the spring of Tilphussa, after which his companions founded the city of Hestiaea. His death was sealed when news of the death of Aegialeus broke the heart of Adrastus. His advice led to the suicides of two men named Menoeceus. He spent seven years as a celebrated harlot after killing a female snake, and and claimed that women enjoy sex more than men, angering Hera, who blinded him. FTP, name this grandfather of Mopsus and father of Manto, a Theban prophet who revealed the crimes of Oedipus.

ANSWER: Teiresias

Result: 2965 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 57200

Question: The Etruscan demon Charun was depicted with the nose of this creature, which was paired with the cobra as a symbol of the Two Ladies in Egyptian mythology. In Hindu mythology, the king of these creatures was Jatayu. In Plutarch's Roman Questions, Hercules claims that they are the most righteous of birds. In Tartarus, two of these creatures were charged with torturing Leto's would-be rapist Tityus, and two of these creatures revealed the secret to curing Iphiclus's impotence after Melampus sacrificed two bulls to Apollo and left the carcasses on the altar. FTP, name these creatures, one of which was charged with gnawing the liver of Prometheus.

ANSWER: vultures

Result: 2966 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57201

Question: After performing the great horse sacrifice, he kidnapped Tara, returning her only after impregnating her. He was married to twenty-seven sisters, but showed such a preference for Rohini that the other twenty-six complained to their father, the sage Daksha, who cursed this character with childlessness and consumption for 15 days at a time. He is nourished with ocean water by Surya when he is exhausted from feeding the Pitris and various divinities, particularly Indra. FTP, name this moon god, the personification of a magical liquid also known as amrita.

ANSWER: Soma (prompt on Chandra)

Result: 2967 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57202

Question: He founded Petelia and Crimissa in southern Italy, where he fled after being expelled by rebels from his city of Meliboea in Thessaly. This son of Demonassa and Poeas received his most prized possessions in gratitude for lighting a pyre for an uncle of Iolaus, an act which earned him the ire of Hera, who arranged a near-mortal wound for him. That wound was healed by Podaleirius or Machaon after Odysseus and Diomedes brought this man from Lemnos. He then dealt a mortal wound to Paris in an archery duel. FTP, name this man who inherited the bow and arrows of Heracles before being bitten in the ankle by a snake.

ANSWER: Philoctetes

Result: 2968 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57203

Question: In order to increase his potency, the only vegetable this character ate was lettuce, a fact used by his enemies to impregnate him with the semen of his nephew. He was born prematurely when he tore himself out of his mother's womb on the third intercalary day. His skin and hair earned comparisons with the pelt of an ass, and he was usually portrayed with the head of a beast known as the Typhonian animal. His great strength earned him credit as the only god capable of defeating Apep and identification with a warrior god of the Hyksos named Sutekh. FTP, name this evil Egyptian god who fought with Horus for kingship.

ANSWER: Set or Seth (prompt on Sutekh before mention in the question)

Result: 2969 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 57204

Question: Following a battle between Heracles and the centaurs, these creatures were credited with wiping out those centaurs that fled to Sicily. Aphrodite whisked away the Argonaut Butes when he tried to journey to their island, which was home to many heaps of mouldering bones. Hera sponsored a contest which resulted in these creatures losing their wings after they lost to the Muses. They committed suicide after an encounter with the son of Laertes, who had himself tied up after stuffing wax into his crew's ears. FTP, name these creatures who lured sailors to their deaths with an irresistible song.

ANSWER: Sirens

Result: 2970 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 57205

Question: This man's mother owned a ring that grew cold on her finger just before daybreak. After hearing his future predicted by his uncle Gripir, he set out to kill the surviving sons of Hunding, including King Lyngvi. This half-brother of Sinfjotli broke two swords made by his mentor, but his third sword successfully cut a ball of twine carried by a river current and sliced through an anvil. That sword was made from two shards given to this hero by his mother Hjordis, and was forged by Regin. FTP, name this son of Sigmund who rode through the wavering flames to claim Brynhild.

ANSWER: Sigurd

Result: 2971 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 57206

Question: Her servants include a white horseman, a red horseman, and a black horseman, symbolizing dawn, day, and night. As she travels, she uses a broom of silver birch to sweep away her tracks, but her arrival is often heralded by the noisy host of spirits following her. Her dwelling is surrounded by a picket fence topped by skulls, and is usually found spinning rapidly or sitting facing into the forest. She uses a pestle to steer as she flies through the forest in a giant mortar. FTP, name this character from Russian legend, a witch who dwells in a hut on chicken legs.

ANSWER: Baba Yaga Kostianaya Noga or Baba Yaga Bone Legs or Jezi-Baba

Result: 2972 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 57207

Question: The Navajos associated it with the mischievous Tonenili, while the Incas believed that the god Ilyap'a collected it from the Milky Way. The Mayan god associated with this phenomenon was also associated with the frog, while the Zapotecs associated it with their god Cocijo. The Incas believed that by tying up black dogs and letting them starve, they could convince Ilyap'a to send some from his jug. The Inca god Kon was thought to take it with him when he retreated to the north, causing the land to wither. FTP, name this important weather phenomenon associated with the Mayan Chac and the Aztec Tlaloc.

ANSWER: rain

Result: 2973 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 57208

Question: One character of this name ruled the warlike Bistones from the now-vanished city of Tirida. Another character of this name was a cousin of Thersites who, according to some accounts, founded Brundisium before a divine act caused him to disappear and turned his comrades into gentle and virtuous birds. This was also the birthname of Jason. The Thracian king of this name kept his best-known possessions tethered with iron chains to bronze mangers, showing them on occasion to unsuspecting guests. One hero of this name was a member of the Epigoni, and participated in a night raid into the camp of King Rhesus. FTP, give the shared name of the king whose flesh-eating mares were captured by Heracles, and the son of Tydeus who wounded Aphrodite and Ares during the siege of Troy.

ANSWER: Diomedes

Result: 2974 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 7 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57209

Question: A younger god once tied this deity's hair to the beams of his roof while he was asleep, then robbed him and kidnapped his daughter. He received his sister's necklace in exchange for the ten-fists-length sword in a ritual to prove his honesty. After his nails were pulled out and his beard cut off by the gods, he planted the hairs of his beard on the mountains, forming the Forest of Kii. Known affectionately as the Impetuous Male, he defeated an eight-headed snake, taking from its tail the "grass-cutting sword" Kusanagi. FTP, name this noisy storm god who often bothered his sister Amaterasu.

ANSWER: Susanowo or Susanowa or Susanoo

Result: 2975 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 57210

Question: One of these items was the primary attribute of the Continental Celtic god Sucellus. The Etruscan demon Charun was often depicted with one of these, which he used to finish off victims, and the Finnish god Pajainen was depicted with an axe and one of these items. Loki's lips were once sewn shut in revenge for assuming the form of a gadfly and stinging a dwarf while one of these was being forged, resulting in a short handle on the weapon. The blind Orion followed the sounds of, FTP, what tools used in the workshop of Hephaestus?

ANSWER: hammer or mallet

Result: 2976 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 57230

Question: One of these items was the primary attribute of the Continental Celtic god Sucellus. The Etruscan demon Charun was often depicted with one of these, which he used to finish off victims, and the Finnish god Pajainen was depicted with an axe and one of these items. Loki's lips were once sewn shut in revenge for assuming the form of a gadfly and stinging a dwarf while one of these was being forged, resulting in a short handle on the weapon. The blind Orion followed the sounds of, FTP, what tools used in the workshop of Hephaestus?

ANSWER: hammer or mallet

Result: 2977 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57211

Question: In one epic, she sends advice to Enmerkar by way of Enmerkar's messenger, Lugalbanda. In one hymn, her consort is likened to "A willow that rejoiced not by the watercourse, / A willow whose roots were torn up." Her consort was the son of Duttur, a personification of the ewe, and was chosen by this goddess over the farmer Enkimdu. Some sources state that her mother was Ningal, and her father was the Sumerian moon-god. Her consort, a god of vegetation, was sometimes given the epithet "the Shepherd," and was forced to spend half of each year in the underworld. FTP, name this Sumerian fertility goddess, the wife of Dumuzi, whose Akkadian counterpart was Ishtar.

ANSWER: Inanna

Result: 2978 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57231

Question: In one epic, she sends advice to Enmerkar by way of Enmerkar's messenger, Lugalbanda. In one hymn, her consort is likened to "A willow that rejoiced not by the watercourse, / A willow whose roots were torn up." Her consort was the son of Duttur, a personification of the ewe, and was chosen by this goddess over the farmer Enkimdu. Some sources state that her mother was Ningal, and her father was the Sumerian moon-god. Her consort, a god of vegetation, was sometimes given the epithet "the Shepherd," and was forced to spend half of each year in the underworld. FTP, name this Sumerian fertility goddess, the wife of Dumuzi, whose Akkadian counterpart was Ishtar.

ANSWER: Inanna

Result: 2979 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57212

Question: This woman was originally promised in marriage to King Belus's twin brother Agenor. She met her husband in an episode later parallelled in the life of Hesione, who was saved by this woman's great-grandson Heracles. That episode began when her mother disparaged the beauty of the Nereids, and ended with this woman marrying the hero who stole the eye and tooth of the Graeae. FTP name this daughter of Cepheus and Cassiopeia who was chained naked to a rock before being rescued by Perseus.

ANSWER: Andromeda

Result: 2980 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57232

Question: This woman was originally promised in marriage to King Belus's twin brother Agenor. She met her husband in an episode later parallelled in the life of Hesione, who was saved by this woman's great-grandson Heracles. That episode began when her mother disparaged the beauty of the Nereids, and ended with this woman marrying the hero who stole the eye and tooth of the Graeae. FTP name this daughter of Cepheus and Cassiopeia who was chained naked to a rock before being rescued by Perseus.

ANSWER: Andromeda

Result: 2981 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 57213

Question: He set fire to his enemy's ships, but a blessing from Cybele made them rip free of their anchors, dive into the water, and turn into beautiful nymphs. He made his way into an enemy encampment when Pandarus kept the gate open too long, slaughtering many before being forced to jump in the Tiber. He is lured onto a ship by Juno and led away from a battle which sees the death of his ally Mezentius. His fate is sealed when his opponent sees the belt of Evander's son Pallas on this man's shoulder. FTP name this Rutulian prince whose death is described in the closing lines of the Aeneid.

ANSWER: Turnus

Result: 2982 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 57233

Question: He set fire to his enemy's ships, but a blessing from Cybele made them rip free of their anchors, dive into the water, and turn into beautiful nymphs. He made his way into an enemy encampment when Pandarus kept the gate open too long, slaughtering many before being forced to jump in the Tiber. He is lured onto a ship by Juno and led away from a battle which sees the death of his ally Mezentius. His fate is sealed when his opponent sees the belt of Evander's son Pallas on this man's shoulder. FTP name this Rutulian prince whose death is described in the closing lines of the Aeneid.

ANSWER: Turnus

Result: 2983 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57214

Question: In some stories, this character was said to carry clouds filled with rainbows and seeds. In other accounts, he carried a bag of babies which he left with young women, and a bag of leather with which to make moccasins for the women he wanted to seduce. The Hopi and Zuni believed he had the power to bring rain, while the Winnebago believed that he could detach his penis and send it downriver to impregnate bathing maidens. FTP, name this trickster depicted with a humped back and a flute.

ANSWER: Kokopelli

Result: 2984 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57234

Question: In some stories, this character was said to carry clouds filled with rainbows and seeds. In other accounts, he carried a bag of babies which he left with young women, and a bag of leather with which to make moccasins for the women he wanted to seduce. The Hopi and Zuni believed he had the power to bring rain, while the Winnebago believed that he could detach his penis and send it downriver to impregnate bathing maidens. FTP, name this trickster depicted with a humped back and a flute.

ANSWER: Kokopelli

Result: 2985 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 57215

Question: This man succeeded Alcathous as King of Megara. At the moment of this hero's birth, Heracles threw the skin of the Nemean Lion around him, making him invulnerable except in his neck and arm-pit, which were covered by Heracles's quiver. This son of Periboea and step-son of Hesione helped protect the body of Patroclus. He bound a white-footed ram upright to a pillar and flogged it with a horse's halter while screaming abuse and calling it perfidious Odysseus, after Athena drove him mad. He carried a shield covered with seven layers of bull hide behind which his half-brother Teucer used to shelter. FTP, name this son of Telamon, the greater of two heroes of the same name.

ANSWER: Ajax the Greater or Telamonian Ajax or Ajax of Salamis or Ajax son of Telamon (prompt on Ajax; do not accept Ajax the Lesser, Little Ajax, Oilean Ajax, Locrian Ajax, Ajax son of Oileus or Ajax of Locris)

Result: 2986 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 57235

Question: This man succeeded Alcathous as King of Megara. At the moment of this hero's birth, Heracles threw the skin of the Nemean Lion around him, making him invulnerable except in his neck and arm-pit, which were covered by Heracles's quiver. This son of Periboea and step-son of Hesione helped protect the body of Patroclus. He bound a white-footed ram upright to a pillar and flogged it with a horse's halter while screaming abuse and calling it perfidious Odysseus, after Athena drove him mad. He carried a shield covered with seven layers of bull hide behind which his half-brother Teucer used to shelter. FTP, name this son of Telamon, the greater of two heroes of the same name.

ANSWER: Ajax the Greater or Telamonian Ajax or Ajax of Salamis or Ajax son of Telamon (prompt on Ajax; do not accept Ajax the Lesser, Little Ajax, Oilean Ajax, Locrian Ajax, Ajax son of Oileus or Ajax of Locris)

Result: 2987 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57216

Question: The cry of this creature and the howl of a jackal signaled the doom of the Kauravas to Dhritarashtra. One of these creatures which could cover ten thousand li in one day, and be folded up and put away when not in use, was the favorite mount of Zhang Guo Lao, who rode it backwards. According to Hyginus, one of these creatures was killed after losing a contest on "a matter of physique" to Priapus. One of these creatures was also responsible for preventing Priapus from raping Lotis, or Vesta, who made it her sacred animal. This animal also served as the mount of Dionysus's drunken, elderly attendant Silenus. Apollo punished King Midas by giving him the ears of, FTP, what animal?

ANSWER: ass or donkey

Result: 2988 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57236

Question: The cry of this creature and the howl of a jackal signaled the doom of the Kauravas to Dhritarashtra. One of these creatures which could cover ten thousand li in one day, and be folded up and put away when not in use, was the favorite mount of Zhang Guo Lao, who rode it backwards. According to Hyginus, one of these creatures was killed after losing a contest on "a matter of physique" to Priapus. One of these creatures was also responsible for preventing Priapus from raping Lotis, or Vesta, who made it her sacred animal. This animal also served as the mount of Dionysus's drunken, elderly attendant Silenus. Apollo punished King Midas by giving him the ears of, FTP, what animal?

ANSWER: ass or donkey

Result: 2989 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57217

Question: On one occasion, she cast a decisive vote which resulted in the suicide of Erigone, the daughter of Aegisthus. In some accounts, she saved Zagreus's heart and placed it in a gypsum figure. She let one of her favorites die after she caught him eating the brains of Melanippus, and according to some accounts, she struck Teiresias blind for catching a glimpse of her bathing. She accompanied the son of another of her favorites while disguised as Mentor. Born with the help of a wedge wielded by Hephaestus, FTP name this grey-eyed daughter of Metis who sprang fully-armed from the head of Zeus.

ANSWER: Athena or Athene

Result: 2990 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57237

Question: On one occasion, she cast a decisive vote which resulted in the suicide of Erigone, the daughter of Aegisthus. In some accounts, she saved Zagreus's heart and placed it in a gypsum figure. She let one of her favorites die after she caught him eating the brains of Melanippus, and according to some accounts, she struck Teiresias blind for catching a glimpse of her bathing. She accompanied the son of another of her favorites while disguised as Mentor. Born with the help of a wedge wielded by Hephaestus, FTP name this grey-eyed daughter of Metis who sprang fully-armed from the head of Zeus.

ANSWER: Athena or Athene

Result: 2991 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 57218

Question: She was considered the female counterpart of the ithyphallic god Min. This goddess, whose name means "Lady of the Mansion," is described as "an imitation woman with no vagina" in one of the Pyramid texts. The linen bandages that wrapped mummies were sometimes known as her tresses, and she was sometimes depicted as one of a pair of birds hovering protectively on the walls of coffins, with the other bird representing her older sister. This younger daughter of Geb and Nut abandoned her husband after he committed fratricide, and helped her sister retrieve the pieces of her brother's body. FTP, name the sister of Isis and wife of Set.

ANSWER: Nephthys or Nebthet

Result: 2992 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 57238

Question: She was considered the female counterpart of the ithyphallic god Min. This goddess, whose name means "Lady of the Mansion," is described as "an imitation woman with no vagina" in one of the Pyramid texts. The linen bandages that wrapped mummies were sometimes known as her tresses, and she was sometimes depicted as one of a pair of birds hovering protectively on the walls of coffins, with the other bird representing her older sister. This younger daughter of Geb and Nut abandoned her husband after he committed fratricide, and helped her sister retrieve the pieces of her brother's body. FTP, name the sister of Isis and wife of Set.

ANSWER: Nephthys or Nebthet

Result: 2993 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57219

Question: As a result of a wager, he defeated Gullfaxi in a contest which, in turn, set up the fight between Thor and Hrungnir. One of his descendants proved his worth by swimming across the river Busiltjarn; that descendant was named Grani. He was sent to help Hermod on his quest, leaping over the gate of Hel's hall. His father, the helper of the giant who rebuilt the walls of Asgard, was Svadilfari, and his mother was Loki, who had temporarily assumed the form of a mare. FTP, name this eight-legged horse, the steed of Odin.

ANSWER: Sleipnir

Result: 2994 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57239

Question: As a result of a wager, he defeated Gullfaxi in a contest which, in turn, set up the fight between Thor and Hrungnir. One of his descendants proved his worth by swimming across the river Busiltjarn; that descendant was named Grani. He was sent to help Hermod on his quest, leaping over the gate of Hel's hall. His father, the helper of the giant who rebuilt the walls of Asgard, was Svadilfari, and his mother was Loki, who had temporarily assumed the form of a mare. FTP, name this eight-legged horse, the steed of Odin.

ANSWER: Sleipnir

Result: 2995 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 57220

Question: His daughter Euippe predicted the death and deification of Asclepius, and was seduced by Aeolus. Some accounts state that he was conceived on the Oceanid Philyra by Cronus, who was caught in the act by Rhea, changed form, and fled. According to some accounts, he chose to die after being hit in the knee by an arrow that passed through the arm of Elatus, giving his immortality to Prometheus. He saved Peleus's life, helped him find his sword, advised him on how to win Thetis, and later tutored their son. Also credited with tutoring Heracles and Jason, FTP name this wise centaur.

ANSWER: Cheiron

Result: 2996 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 57240

Question: His daughter Euippe predicted the death and deification of Asclepius, and was seduced by Aeolus. Some accounts state that he was conceived on the Oceanid Philyra by Cronus, who was caught in the act by Rhea, changed form, and fled. According to some accounts, he chose to die after being hit in the knee by an arrow that passed through the arm of Elatus, giving his immortality to Prometheus. He saved Peleus's life, helped him find his sword, advised him on how to win Thetis, and later tutored their son. Also credited with tutoring Heracles and Jason, FTP name this wise centaur.

ANSWER: Cheiron

Result: 2997 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57221

Question: In one story, a character with this name demands the head of Lady Lile, or the head of the Knight of Two Swords, but is beheaded by Balin. Another character who held this title fell in love with a man with an unreciprocated love for Ettard. In one story, she is rescued by Pellinore during the Quest for the White Hart. In some accounts, she is responsible for rearing the son of King Ban, who becomes the greatest knight in the world. She was also sometimes credited with imprisoning Merlin. FTP, give the title of this enchantress who presented Arthur with Excalibur.

ANSWER: Lady of the Lake (accept Viviane or Nimue)

Result: 2998 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57241

Question: In one story, a character with this name demands the head of Lady Lile, or the head of the Knight of Two Swords, but is beheaded by Balin. Another character who held this title fell in love with a man with an unreciprocated love for Ettard. In one story, she is rescued by Pellinore during the Quest for the White Hart. In some accounts, she is responsible for rearing the son of King Ban, who becomes the greatest knight in the world. She was also sometimes credited with imprisoning Merlin. FTP, give the title of this enchantress who presented Arthur with Excalibur.

ANSWER: Lady of the Lake (accept Viviane or Nimue)

Result: 2999 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57222

Question: He assumed the guise of the beautiful girl Mohini following the churning of the oceans and tricked the demons out of their share of amrita. His devotees included Prahlada, and he eventually killed Prahlada's father Hiranyakasipu, stepping out of a pillar in the form of a half-man, half-lion. In the Vedas, he measures out the earth and heavens in three steps, a theme repeated in his incarnation as the dwarf Vamana. FTP, name this god whose ten avatars include Khalki and Buddha, known as the preserver.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 3000 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57242

Question: He assumed the guise of the beautiful girl Mohini following the churning of the oceans and tricked the demons out of their share of amrita. His devotees included Prahlada, and he eventually killed Prahlada's father Hiranyakasipu, stepping out of a pillar in the form of a half-man, half-lion. In the Vedas, he measures out the earth and heavens in three steps, a theme repeated in his incarnation as the dwarf Vamana. FTP, name this god whose ten avatars include Khalki and Buddha, known as the preserver.

ANSWER: Vishnu

Result: 3001 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57223

Question: According to some accounts, Odysseus strangled Antielus while trying to keep Antielus quiet after this woman imitated the voice of Antielus's wife while strolling with her fourth husband. That fourth husband, Deiphobus, was the brother of her third husband. Her third husband convinced her to abandon her second husband and her young daughter Hermione. Her third husband, formerly the lover of Oenone, was promised her love in exchange for awarding the apple of discord to Aphrodite. FTP, name this sister of Polydeuces and Castor whose elopement started the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Helen

Result: 3002 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57243

Question: According to some accounts, Odysseus strangled Antielus while trying to keep Antielus quiet after this woman imitated the voice of Antielus's wife while strolling with her fourth husband. That fourth husband, Deiphobus, was the brother of her third husband. Her third husband convinced her to abandon her second husband and her young daughter Hermione. Her third husband, formerly the lover of Oenone, was promised her love in exchange for awarding the apple of discord to Aphrodite. FTP, name this sister of Polydeuces and Castor whose elopement started the Trojan War.

ANSWER: Helen

Result: 3003 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 57224

Question: This god asked for a magical pig-skin that could heal all wounds as part of a fine levied against the sons of Turenn. This foster son of Manannan mac Lir claimed competence in ten arts, including cupbearing, to gain entrance to Tara, then proceeded to win a game of fidchell and defeat Oghma in a flagstone-hurling contest. This son of Cian and Ethniu fulfilled a prophecy during the second battle of Mag Tuired when he killed his maternal grandfather, Balor of the Evil Eye. FTP name this god who succeeded Nuada to leadership of the Tuatha de Dánann, considered the divine father of Cuchulainn.

ANSWER: Lugh of the Long Hand or Lamfhada or Samildanac or mac Ethnenn

Result: 3004 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 57244

Question: This god asked for a magical pig-skin that could heal all wounds as part of a fine levied against the sons of Turenn. This foster son of Manannan mac Lir claimed competence in ten arts, including cupbearing, to gain entrance to Tara, then proceeded to win a game of fidchell and defeat Oghma in a flagstone-hurling contest. This son of Cian and Ethniu fulfilled a prophecy during the second battle of Mag Tuired when he killed his maternal grandfather, Balor of the Evil Eye. FTP name this god who succeeded Nuada to leadership of the Tuatha de Dánann, considered the divine father of Cuchulainn.

ANSWER: Lugh of the Long Hand or Lamfhada or Samildanac or mac Ethnenn

Result: 3005 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 57225

Question: This character's bed hangings were known as Glimmering Misfortune. She kept the company of her most illustrious guest with the help of her father, who disguised himself as the witch Thokk. The maiden Modgud guarded the bridge over the river Gjoll which allowed entrance to this character's realm, which was sometimes called Nastrond. The entrance to her realm was also guarded by the perpetually bloody-chested, four-eyed hound Garm. Described as half black, half flesh-color, and all grim, FTP name this youngest child of Loki and Angrboda who ruled over the dead.

ANSWER: Hel

Result: 3006 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 57245

Question: This character's bed hangings were known as Glimmering Misfortune. She kept the company of her most illustrious guest with the help of her father, who disguised himself as the witch Thokk. The maiden Modgud guarded the bridge over the river Gjoll which allowed entrance to this character's realm, which was sometimes called Nastrond. The entrance to her realm was also guarded by the perpetually bloody-chested, four-eyed hound Garm. Described as half black, half flesh-color, and all grim, FTP name this youngest child of Loki and Angrboda who ruled over the dead.

ANSWER: Hel

Result: 3007 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 57226

Question: One character of this name, who was killed by his cousin Agamemnon, was the first husband of Clytemnestra. That character was named for his paternal grandfather, who conspired with Pandareus to steal a golden mastiff belonging to Zeus. In addition to that crime, some sources state that this mortal stole ambrosia to give to his friends. His worst crime occurred during a banquet he hosted, during which only Demeter ate the food he offered. FTP name this man who killed and cooked his son Pelops for the gods, punished in Hades by being tempted with water he can never reach.

ANSWER: Tantalus

Result: 3008 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 57246

Question: One character of this name, who was killed by his cousin Agamemnon, was the first husband of Clytemnestra. That character was named for his paternal grandfather, who conspired with Pandareus to steal a golden mastiff belonging to Zeus. In addition to that crime, some sources state that this mortal stole ambrosia to give to his friends. His worst crime occurred during a banquet he hosted, during which only Demeter ate the food he offered. FTP name this man who killed and cooked his son Pelops for the gods, punished in Hades by being tempted with water he can never reach.

ANSWER: Tantalus

Result: 3009 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 57227

Question: According to some accounts, the handmaiden Galanthis was turned into a weasel and condemned to give birth through the mouth by this goddess or her daugher Eileithyia. In one story, she breast-feeds her stepson, resulting in the formation of the Milky Way. Homer describes her as "white-armed" and "ox-eyed." She was once chained by the wrists with anvils attached to her ankles after leading a revolt against her brother. Her wedding night lasted three hundred years, and her wedding gifts included the tree with the golden apples of the Hesperides. FTP, name this mother of Ares and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera (accept Hecate before "in honor of this goddess")

Result: 3010 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 57247

Question: According to some accounts, the handmaiden Galanthis was turned into a weasel and condemned to give birth through the mouth by this goddess or her daugher Eileithyia. In one story, she breast-feeds her stepson, resulting in the formation of the Milky Way. Homer describes her as "white-armed" and "ox-eyed." She was once chained by the wrists with anvils attached to her ankles after leading a revolt against her brother. Her wedding night lasted three hundred years, and her wedding gifts included the tree with the golden apples of the Hesperides. FTP, name this mother of Ares and wife of Zeus.

ANSWER: Hera (accept Hecate before "in honor of this goddess")

Result: 3011 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 57228

Question: He was cooked in a cauldron for 49 days, but emerged unharmed, with the ability to see evil. Like Mithras, he was born from a stone; unlike Mithras, he was born on the Mountain of Fruit and Flowers, and learned cloud flying and the 72 transformations. He defeated the Red Boy, who wanted to gain immortality by eating the flesh of a monk. After realizing that his appointment as Manager of the Heavenly Stables was an insult, this mischievous character ate some Pills of Longevity and Peaches of Immortality, and threatened the Jade Emperor. Serving as bodyguard to the monk Xuan Zang, or Tripitaka, FTP name this simian protagonist of Journey to the West.

ANSWER: Handsome Monkey King or Monkey of the Mind or Sun Wukong or Sun Hou-zi (accept Pi Ma-Wen or Manager of the Heavenly Stables before "Manager of the Heavenly Stables" is mentioned in the question; if a player actually gives one of these answers, feel free to warn them that they have angered Monkey)

Result: 3012 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 57248

Question: He was cooked in a cauldron for 49 days, but emerged unharmed, with the ability to see evil. Like Mithras, he was born from a stone; unlike Mithras, he was born on the Mountain of Fruit and Flowers, and learned cloud flying and the 72 transformations. He defeated the Red Boy, who wanted to gain immortality by eating the flesh of a monk. After realizing that his appointment as Manager of the Heavenly Stables was an insult, this mischievous character ate some Pills of Longevity and Peaches of Immortality, and threatened the Jade Emperor. Serving as bodyguard to the monk Xuan Zang, or Tripitaka, FTP name this simian protagonist of Journey to the West.

ANSWER: Handsome Monkey King or Monkey of the Mind or Sun Wukong or Sun Hou-zi (accept Pi Ma-Wen or Manager of the Heavenly Stables before "Manager of the Heavenly Stables" is mentioned in the question; if a player actually gives one of these answers, feel free to warn them that they have angered Monkey)

Result: 3013 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57229

Question: In the Book of Gates, the god Nun lifts it from the depths. It was protected by the coils of the mehen-snake from threats such as the monsters Sebau and Nak. At night, when it was known as Mesektet, the god Sia acted as its spokesman, giving the orders to open each of twelve gates as it was towed by jackals and cobras through the underworld. The fishes Ant and Abtu helped pilot, while Thoth was sometimes considered its navigator, and Hathor was often depicted standing in its prow. FTP, name this vessel in which Ra made his daily journey.

ANSWER: solar barque or solar boat or sun barque or sun boat or the Boat of Millions or the Barque of Millions

Result: 3014 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 8 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57249

Question: In the Book of Gates, the god Nun lifts it from the depths. It was protected by the coils of the mehen-snake from threats such as the monsters Sebau and Nak. At night, when it was known as Mesektet, the god Sia acted as its spokesman, giving the orders to open each of twelve gates as it was towed by jackals and cobras through the underworld. The fishes Ant and Abtu helped pilot, while Thoth was sometimes considered its navigator, and Hathor was often depicted standing in its prow. FTP, name this vessel in which Ra made his daily journey.

ANSWER: solar barque or solar boat or sun barque or sun boat or the Boat of Millions or the Barque of Millions

Result: 3015 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 1 | Mythology | NoneID: 57272

Question: His bastard son Elymus helped Aegestes found four cities. He traveled with Antenor to negotiate for the release of Hesione by Telamon, but the mission failed, angering his cousin Priam. Zeus threw a thunderbolt at him for a foolish boast, but his lover interposed her girdle so that the bolt hit the ground under his feet and made him lame. Because of his lameness, during the sack of Troy he had to be carried on his son's back. FTP, name this prince of the house of Troy who slept with Aphrodite and became the father of Aeneas.

ANSWER: Anchises

Result: 3016 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 2 | Mythology | NoneID: 57273

Question: In some accounts, they are said to have sprung from Brahma's foot, while other accounts state that they are descendants of the sage Pulastya, or of the sage Kasyapa by his wife Khasa. They include the grahas, who often accompany Karttikeya, the Bhutas, who attend Shiva when he haunts cemeteries, and the panis, whose devious ways make them the special foes of Indra. Their best-known leader stole the chariot Pushpaka and the palace of Lanka from his half-brother Kubera. FTP, name these shape-shifting demons led at various times by Sisupala, Hiranyakasipu, and Ravana.

ANSWER: rakshasas

Result: 3017 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 3 | Mythology | NoneID: 57274

Question: In one story, this character figures out how to make a net by looking at the ashes of a net made by Loki. His birth came about as a consequence of the burning of Gullveig. In another story, some of his blood is placed in the kettle Odrorir after he is murdered by the dwarves Fjalar and Galar, who mix the blood with honey. The precious liquid formed from this man's blood was taken from Fjalar and Galar by Suttung, but then Odin robbed Suttung of the mead of poetry. FTP, name this exceptionally wise man created from the spittle of the Vanir and Aesir.

ANSWER: Kvasir

Result: 3018 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 4 | Mythology | NoneID: 57275

Question: His brother Menoetius was killed under his command during a war that lasted ten years before he and his side were put to flight by a shout from Pan. He was the father-in-law of Sisyphus, who married this character's daughter Merope. According to some accounts, he was inhospitable to Perseus, resulting in his petrification. Another hero asked him for help, then asked for time to adjust a lionskin cloak, tricking this character into resuming his task. He was the father of seven daughters by Pleione, as well as the Hyades and Hesperides. FTP, name this Titan who was sentenced to carry the world on his shoulders.

ANSWER: Atlas

Result: 3019 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 5 | Mythology | NoneID: 57276

Question: While being pursued by hags, he tossed his headdress behind him; it turned into grapes, which the hags stopped to devour. At the Even Pass, he forced his pursuers to retreat by pelting them with three peaches. He went to the Land of Darkness to bring back his wife, but found her covered with maggots, rotting and putrescent. This god created two gods and a goddess while cleaning his face after trying to retrieve his wife, who died after giving birth to the fire god Kagutsuchi. FTP, name this father of Susanowo and Amaterasu, the husband of Izanami.

ANSWER: Izanagi

Result: 3020 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 6 | Mythology | NoneID: 57277

Question: Members took vows never to retreat in battle, and never to require a dowry or be rude to women. In one test, applicants were buried up to the waist, given a stick and shield, and expected to ward off javelins thrown by nine warriors. Several of them were beheaded mistakenly after being kicked out of a magic quicken-tree by a foster-son of the god Aengus. Known for various missions undertaken on behalf of the high king Cormac mac Airt, FTP, name this group of foot warriors whose members included Diarmuid and Oscar, the grandson of their last leader, Finn MacCool.

ANSWER: Fenians or Fianna Eireann

Result: 3021 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 7 | Mythology | NoneID: 57278

Question: When Heracles visited Hades to capture Cerberus, the only ghosts who did not flee were those of Meleager and this creature. By some accounts, the three-headed shepherd Cacus was her son by Hephaestus, and the three-bodied giant Geryon was the son of another of her sons, whose name meant "golden falchion." This mortal daughter of Ceto and Phorcys was killed by a hero who was equipped by the Stygian Nymphs with a magic wallet. That hero evaded her immortal sisters with the help of winged sandals and Hades's helmet of invisibility. FTP, name this sister of Stheno and Euryale who was decapitated by Perseus, a Gorgon who petrified anything that saw her

ANSWER: Medusa

Result: 3022 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 8 | Mythology | NoneID: 57279

Question: The tigillum sororium was flanked by altars to Juno Sororia and this god with the epithet Curiatius. He supposedly prevented the Sabines from capturing the Forum by causing jets of boiling water to spring up at the entrance. He was identified with Portunus, the youthful god of ferries and harbors, recalling this god's earlier provenance over bridges and crossing places. He was named first in formal prayers to the gods, as the god of beginnings. FTP, name this Roman god of entrances and exits, depicted on coins looking before and behind with his two faces.

ANSWER: Janus

Result: 3023 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 9 | Mythology | NoneID: 57280

Question: This character was usually found in the company of the daughter of Pebin, relaxing in his court of Caer Dathyl. His niece gave birth to a son and a blob when she stepped over his magic rod. This occurred after the rape of Goewin, while this god was looking for a replacement virgin footholder. This god of sorcery took pity on his niece Arianrhod's son Lleu Llaw Gyffes, helping to create the flower-woman Blodeuedd. FTP, name this brother of Don and uncle of Gwydion, the son of Mathonwy.

ANSWER: Math ap Mathonwy

Result: 3024 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 10 | Mythology | NoneID: 57281

Question: While refitting his shattered fleet at Molossia, he heard of his grandfather's banishment from Phthia, set sail for Iolcus, and captured the city after killing the sons of Acastus. He killed the prince Polites, then killed the father of Polites and dragged the corpse to his own father's tomb, leaving it there to rot, unburied and headless. The god Heracles appeared on Lemnos to state that Philoctetes and this son of Deidameia were both necessary for Greek victory in the Trojan War. After the victory, he was given Andromache as a slave. Infamous for beheading Priam, FTP name this son of Achilles.

ANSWER: Neoptolemus or Pyrrhus

Result: 3025 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 11 | Mythology | NoneID: 57282

Question: This god went to have his regalia restored after Erra cunningly offered to take his place in his temple Esagila. His symbol was a triangular implement similar to a hoe, and his emblematic creature was the serpent-dragon, or Mushussu, later associated with his son Nabu. His mother, whose Akkadian epithet means "Queen of the Apsu," was Damkina, and his consort was Sarpanitu. FTP, name this son of Ea, "the Young Bull of the Sun," who became the supreme god of the Babylonian pantheon in return for defeating Tiamat.

ANSWER: Bel Marduk

Result: 3026 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 12 | Mythology | NoneID: 57283

Question: In some versions of a Greek myth, an example of this act took place near the recipient's namesake river as a result of a decision by Tmolus which also indirectly resulted in the death of a barber. In Japanese myth, Susanowo did this to a horse, then tossed it through the roof of Amaterasu's hall. In Aztec myth, the fertility god Xipe Totec did this to himself in order to stimulate growth. In Greek myth, this act was perpetrated on a satyr who picked up an instrument cursed by Athena, then lost a contest when he was unable to play his pipes upside-down. FTP, name the harsh punishment inflicted by Apollo on Marsyas, after which he nailed Marsyas's skin to a tree.

ANSWER: flaying or flayed

Result: 3027 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 13 | Mythology | NoneID: 57284

Question: This character once beat a six-headed, six-handed god in a race around the world by sitting down and studying the scriptures while his rival set off running. That rival, sometimes considered his brother, was the war god Skanda or Karttikeya. While disguised as a cowherd, he was given the Atmalingam by Ravana, who had taken it from this god's father. This god of wisdom and prudence was also credited with transcribing, at Vyasa's dictation, the Mahabharata. FTP, name this god who, rather than block an axe belonging to his father Shiva, allowed Parasurama to break one of his tusks.

ANSWER: Ganesh

Result: 3028 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 14 | Mythology | NoneID: 57285

Question: The River-god Helicon dove underground to avoid becoming an accessory to this man's murder when his killers went to cleanse themselves of his blood. This father of Leos was said to have tutored the young Midas. According to some accounts, Thamyris and this man were taught by his brother Linus before Apollo killed Linus out of jealousy. He uttered prophecies after his death until he was ordered to shut up by Apollo, who traveled to the isle of Lemnos where the river Hebrus had deposited his head after he was torn apart by Maenads. FTP, name this son of Oeagrus and Calliope who provided a respite for Tantalus and Sisyphus and charmed Cerberus with his music.

ANSWER: Orpheus

Result: 3029 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 15 | Mythology | NoneID: 57286

Question: One character of this name was the daughter of King Hoel, whose servants included Gesnes. Another character of this name matched a broken-off piece from the sword that killed her uncle with a guest's sword, but refrained from reporting the killer because he had recently killed a dragon. The latter had a maid named Brangaene who prepared a love potion to ease her incipient marriage; the former, a princess in Brittany, was known for her white hands. The latter became Queen of Cornwall after marrying King Mark. FTP, name these two women who loved Tristan.

ANSWER: Isolde or Isoude

Result: 3030 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 16 | Mythology | NoneID: 57287

Question: This character was responsible for killing Ajax the Lesser. According to some sources, he appointed Pelops his cupbearer and bedfellow. The giant Antaeus collected skulls to roof a temple to this god, said to be Antaeus's father, who was forced to work for Laomedon, helping on building the walls of Troy. He fathered the nymph Despoena and the wild horse Arion on one of his sisters. This god, sometimes known as the Earth-Shaker, lost a contest for patronage of Athens to his niece Athena. FTP name this husband of Amphitrite, the Greek god of the sea.

ANSWER: Poseidon (accept Athena before "he appointed")

Result: 3031 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 17 | Mythology | NoneID: 57288

Question: In one myth, he sheds the first tears and digs the first grave after his son is killed by a rattle-snake during a race. In another story, he gives his blanket to the powerful rock Iya, then takes it back when he gets cold; in retaliation, Iya flattens him. This happens while he is traveling with Iktomi, a similarly oversexed figure who shares his penchant for mischief. Often appearing as an antagonist to his brother Wolf, FTP name this popular Native American trickster figure.

ANSWER: Coyote

Result: 3032 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 18 | Mythology | NoneID: 57289

Question: In one story the irresistible Taboubu, the daughter of a priest of this goddess, punishes Prince Setna for the theft of a sacred book. The goddess Pekhet was sometimes considered a secondary aspect of this goddess, whose name means "She of the Ointment Jar." The confused Greeks identified her with Artemis, so that in later times she was sometimes considered the sister of Horus. At her cult center, she was regarded as both the daughter and consort of Atum-Ra, and by him the mother of Mahes, a lion deity. Sometimes considered a gentler aspect of Sekhmet, FTP name this cat-headed goddess.

ANSWER: Bastet

Result: 3033 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 19 | Mythology | NoneID: 57290

Question: This name was shared by the leader of the twelve sacred white bulls of Augeius and by a son of Eos and Cephalus who was stolen by Aphrodite. When another character of this name died, his grieving sisters were transformed into poplar-trees, weeping amber tears, or into a thicket of alder by the banks of the Eridanus or the Po. That character was a nephew of Eos and son of Clymene. According to Ovid, he gave the Ethiopians their dark skins and turned Libya into a desert after he lost control of his father's chariot, scorching the earth by bringing the sun too close. FTP, name this son of Helius.

ANSWER: Phaëthon

Result: 3034 | Teitler Myth Singles | 2005 | Round: 9 | Question: 20 | Mythology | NoneID: 57291

Question: On one occasion, this creature is lured by the head of Sky-bellower. On another occasion, several giants are frightened by the results of a lifting contest involving this creature in disguise, when a god lifts one paw of Utgard-Loki's cat. The first occasion sees the frightened giant Hymir release this creature, cutting Thor's fishing line. At Ragnarok, this creature will kill and be killed by Thor, presumably after releasing its tail from its mouth. FTP name this creature which encircles the world in Norse mythology, an enormous snake-like beast.

ANSWER: Midgard Serpent or Jormungandr or Midgardsorm